2. The extinction of selfThereupon the Venerable Subhuti, by the Buddha’s might, said to the
Lord: The Lord has said, ‘Make it clear now, Subhuti, to the Bodhisattvas, the great beings,
starting from perfect wisdom, how the Bodhisattvas, the great beings go forth into perfect
wisdom!’When one speaks of a ‘Bodhisattva,’ what dharma does that word ‘Bodhisattva’
denote? I do not, O Lord, see that dharma ‘Bodhisattva’ (5,1),nor a dharma called ‘perfect
wisdom.’Since I neither find, nor apprehend, nor see a dharma ‘Bodhisattva,’ nor a ‘perfect
wisdom,’ what Bodhisattva shall I instruct and admonish in what perfect wisdom? And yet,
O Lord, if, when this is pointed out, a Bodhisattva’s heart does not become cowed, nor stolid,
does not despair nor despond, if he does not turn away or become dejected, does not
tremble, is not frightened or terrified, it is just this Bodhisattva, this great being who
should be instructed in perfect wisdom.It is precisely this that should be recognised as
the perfect wisdom of that Bodhisattva, as his instruction in perfect wisdom.When he thus
stands firm, that is his instruction and admonition.

Morever, when a Bodhisattva courses in perfect wisdom and develops it, he should so train himself
that he does not pride himself on that thought of enlightenment [with which he has begun
his career].That thought is no thought,since in its essential original nature thought
is transparently luminous.

Sariputra: That thought which is no thought, is that something is? Subhuti: Does there exist,
or can one apprehend in this state of absence of thought either a ‘there is’ or a ‘there
is not’? Sariputra: No, not that.

(6) Subhuti: Was it then a suitable question when the Venerable Sariputra asked whether that
thought which is no thought is something which is? Sariputra: What then is this state of
absence of thought? Subhuti: It is without modification or discrimination.

Sariputra: Well do you expound this, Subhuti,you whom the Lord has declared to be the foremost
of those who dwell in Peace.

And for that reason [i.e. because he does not pride himself on that thought of enlightenment]
should a Bodhisattva be considered as incapable of turning away from full enlightenment,
and as one who will never cease from taking perfect wisdom to heart.Whether one wants to
train on the level of Disciple, or Pratyekabuddha, or Bodhisattva, - one should listen to
this perfection of wisdom, take it up, bear it in mind, recite it, study it, spread it among
others, and in this very perfection of wisdom should one be trained and exert oneself.See
the previous recordIn this very perfection of wisdom should one endowed with skill in means
exert himself, with the aim of procuring all the dharmas which constitute a Bodhisattva.
In this very perfection of wisdom should one endowed with skill in means exert himself,
with the aim of procuring all the dharmas which constitute a Bodhisattva.(7) In just this
perfection of wisdom all the dharmas which constitute a Bodhisattva, and in which he should
be trained and exert himself, are indicated in full detail.He who wants to train for full
enlightenment should also listen, etc., to this perfection of wisdom.One who is endowed
with skill in means should exert himself in just this perfection of wisdom, with the aim
of procuring all the dharmas which constitute a Buddha.

Subhuti: I who do not find anything to correspond to the word ‘Bodhisattva,’ or the words ‘perfect
wisdom,’ – which Bodhisattva should I then instruct and admonish in which perfect wisdom?It
would surely be regrettable if I, unable to find the thing itself, should merely
in words cause a Bodhisattva to arise and to pass away.Moreover, what is thus designated is
not continuous nor not-continuous, not discontinuous or not-discontinuous.And why? Because
it does not exist.That is why it is not continuous nor not-continuous, not discontinuous
or not-discontinuous.A Bodhisattva who does not become afraid when this deep and perfect
wisdom is being taught (8) should be recognized as not lacking in perfect wisdom, as standing
at the irreversible stage of a Bodhisattva, standing firmly, in consequence of not taking
his stand anywhere.Moreover, a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wisdom and develops
it, should not stand in form, etc.Because, when he stands in form, etc., he courses in its
formative influences, he cannot gain perfect wisdom, nor exert himself upon it, nor fulfil
it.When he does not fulfil perfect wisdom, he cannot go forth to all-knowledge, so long
as he remains one who tries to appropriate the essentially elusive.For in perfect wisdom
form is not appropriated.But the non-appropriation of form, etc., is not form, etc. And perfect
wisdom also cannot be appropriated.It is thus that a Bodhisattva should course in this
perfect wisdom.This concentrated insight of a Bodhisattva is called ‘the non-appropriation
of all dharmas.’ It is vast, noble, unlimited and steady, not shared by any of the Disciples
or Pratyekabuddhas. The state of all-knowledge itself cannot be taken hold of, because
it cannot be seized through a sign.If it could be seized through a sign, then Srenika,
the Wanderer, would not have gained faith in this our religion.Srenika, the Wanderer, believed
resolutely in this cognition of the all-knowing, and as a ‘faith-follower’ he (9) entered
on a cognition with a limited scope.He did not take hold of form, etc.Nor did he review
that cognition with joyful zest and pleasure.He viewed it neither as inside form, etc.,
nor as outside, nor as both inside and outside,nor as other than form, etc.In this scripture
passage, Srenika, the Wanderer, as one who always resolutely believes in this cognition
of the all-knowing, is called a faith-follower.so that he did not take hold of any dharma,
nor apprehend any dharma, which he could have appropriated or released. He did not even
care about Nirvana.This also should be known as a Bodhisattva’s perfect wisdom, that he
does not take hold of form, etc.,and that he does not enter Nirvana midway, before he has
realized the ten powers of a Tathagata, his four grounds of self-confidence, and the eighteen
dharmas peculiar to a Buddha.Therefore this too should be known as a Bodhisattva’s perfect
wisdom.

(10) Further, a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wisdom and develops it, should consider and
meditate on what that perfect wisdom is, on him who has it, and on this perfect wisdom
as a dharma which does not exist, which cannot be apprehended. When these considerations do
not make him afraid, then he is to be known as a Bodhisattva who possesses perfect wisdom.

Sariputra: How can a Bodhisattva be known as possessing perfect wisdom, when the very form does
not possess the own-being of form, etc.; when perfect wisdom does not possess the own-being
of perfect wisdom; when the very all-knowledge does not possess the own-being of all-knowledge?

Subhuti: It is so, Sariputra.Form itself does not possess the own-being of form, etc.Perfect
wisdom does not possess the mark (of being) ‘perfect wisdom.’A mark does not possess the
own-being of a mark.The marked does not possess the own-being of being marked,and own-being
does not possess the mark of [being] own-being.

(11) Sariputra: Nevertheless, the Bodhisattva who trains in this will go forth to all-knowledge?
Subhuti: He will.Because all dharmas are unborn, and do not go forth.When he courses
thus, a Bodhisattva comes near to all-knowledge.To the extend that he comes near to all-knowledge,
his body, thought and marks shall become perfectly pure, for the sake of maturing
beings, and he shall meet with the Buddhas.It is thus that a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect
wisdom comes near to all-knowledge.

Subhuti said further concerning the Bodhisattva: He courses in a sign when he courses in form,
etc., or in the sign of form, etc., or in the idea that ‘form is a sign,’or in the production
of form,or in the stoppingor destruction of form,or in the idea that ‘form is empty,’or
‘I course,’or ‘I am a Bodhisattva.’For he actually courses in the idea ‘I am a Bodhisattva’
as a basis.(12) Or, when it occurs to him ‘he who courses thus, courses in perfect
wisdom and develops it,’ – he courses only in a sign. Such a Bodhisattva should be known as
unskilled in means.

Sariputra: How then must a Bodhisattva course if he is to course in perfect wisdom? Subhuti:
He should not course in the skandhas, nor in their sign, nor in the idea that ‘the skandhas
are signs,’ nor in the production of the skandhas, in their stopping or destruction, nor
in the idea that ‘the skandhas are empty,’ or ‘I course,’ or ‘I am a Bodhisattva.’And (13)
it should not occur to him, ‘he who courses thus, courses in perfect wisdom and develops
it.’He courses but he does not entertain such ideas as ‘I course,’ ‘I do not course,’ ‘I
course and I do not course,’ ‘I neither course nor do I not course,’ and the same [four]
with ‘I will course.’He does not go near any dharma at all, because all dharmas are unapproachable
and unappropriable.The Bodhisattva then has the concentrated insight ‘Not grasping
at any dharma’ by name, vast, noble, unlimited and steady, not shared by any of the Disciples
or Pratyekabuddhas.When he dwells in this concentrated insight, a Bodhisattva will quickly
win the full enlightenment

which the Tathagatas of the past have predicted for him.But when he dwells in that concentration,
he does not review it, nor think ‘I am collected,’ ‘I will enter into concentration,’
‘I am entering into concentration,’ ‘I have entered into concentration.’ All that in each
and every way does not exist for him.

(14) Sariputra: Can one show forth that concentration? Subhuti: No, Sariputra.Because that son
of good family neither knows nor perceives it.Sariputra: You say that he neither knows
nor perceives it? Subhuti: I do, for that concentration does not exist.The Lord: Well said,
Subhuti.And thus should a Bodhisattva train therein, because then he trains in perfect wisdom.

Sariputra: When he thus trains, he trains in perfect wisdom? The Lord: When he thus trains,
he trains in perfect wisdom.

Sariputra: When he thus trains, which dharmas does he train in? The Lord: He does not train
in any dharma at all.(15) Because the dharmas do not exist in such a way as foolish untaught,
common people are accustomed to suppose.Sariputra: How then do they exist? The Lord: As
they do not exist, so they exist.And so, since they do not exist [avidyamāna], they are
called [the result of] ignorance [avidyā].Foolish, untaught, common people have settled down
in them.Although they do not exist, they have constructed all the dharmas.Having constructed
them, attached to the two extremes, they do not know or see those dharmas [in their
true reality].So they construct all dharmas which yet do not exist.Having constructed them,
they settle down in the two extremes. They then depend on that link as a basic fact, and
construct past, future and present dharmas.After they have constructed, they settle down
in name and form.They have constructed all dharmas which yet do not exist. But while they
construct all dharmas which yet do not exist, they neither know nor see the path which is
that which truly is.In consequence they do not go forth from the triple world, and do not
wake up to the reality-limit.For that reason they come to be styled ‘fools.’They have no faith
in the true dharma.But a Bodhisattva does not settle down in any dharma.

Sariputra: When he trains thus, is a Bodhisattva trained in all-knowledge? The Lord: When he
thus trains himself, a Bodhisattva is not even trained in all-knowledge, and yet he is trained
in all dharmas.(16) When he thus trains himself, a Bodhisattva is trained in all-knowledge,
comes near to it, goes forth to it.

Subhuti: If, O Lord, someone should ask, - ‘Will this illusory man be trained in all-knowledge,
will he come near it, will he go forth to it?’ – How should one explain it? The Lord:
I will ask you a counter-question which you may answer as best you can.Subhuti: Well said,
O Lord. And the Venerable Subhuti listened to the Lord.The Lord: What do you think, Subhuti,
is form, etc., one thing, and illusion another?Subhuti: No Lord.Because it is not so that
illusion is one thing, and form, etc., another; the very form is illusion, the very illusion
is form.

The Lord: What do you think, Subhuti, is that notion ‘Bodhisattva,’ that denomination, that
concept, that conventional expression, - in the five grasping skandhas? Subhuti: Yes, it is.Because
a Bodhisattva who trains himself in perfect wisdom should train himself like an
illusory man for full enlightenment.(17) For one should bear in mind that the five grasping
aggregates are like an illusory man.Because the Lord has said that form is like an illusion.And
what is true of form, is true also of the six sense organs, and of the five [grasping]
aggregates.Subhuti: Will not Bodhisattvas who have newly set out in the vehicle tremble
when they hear this exposition?The Lord: They will tremble if they get into the hands of
bad friends,but not if they get into the hands of good friends.

Subhuti: Who then are a Bodhisattva’s good friends? The Lord: Those who instruct and admonish
him in the perfections.Those who point out to him the deeds of Mara,saying ‘this is how
the faults and deeds of Mara should be recognized.These are the faults and deeds of Mara.You
should get rid of them after you have recognized them.’These should be known as the good
friends of a Bodhisattva, a great being, who is armed with the great armour, who has set
out in the great vehicle, who has mounted on the great vehicle. (18,1)

