4. The meaning of ‘great being’Subhuti: Again, when the Lord speaks of a Bodhisattva as ‘a great
being,’ – for what reason is a Bodhisattva called a ‘great being’? The Lord: A Bodhisattva
is called ‘a great being’ in the sense that he will cause a great mass and collection
of beings to achieve the highest.

Sariputra: It is clear also to me in what sense a Bodhisattva is called a ‘great being.’ (19,1)The
Lord: Then make it clear what you think now!Sariputra: A Bodhisattva is called a ‘great
being’ in the sense that he will demonstrate dharma so that the great errors should be
forsaken, - such erroneous views as the assumption of a self, a being, a living soul, a
person, of becoming, of not-becoming, of annihilation, of eternity, of individuality, etc.Subhuti:
It is clear also to me in what sense a Bodhisattva is called a ‘great being.’The
Lord: Then make it clear what you think now!Subhuti: A Bodhisattva is called a ‘great being,’if
he remains unattached to, and uninvolved in, the thought of enlightenment, the thought
of all-knowledge, the thought without outflows, the unequalled thought, the thought which
equals the unequalled, unshared by any of the Disciples or Pratyekabuddhas.Because that
thought of all-knowledge is [itself] without outflows, and unincluded [in the empirical world].
And in respect of that thought of all-knowledge, which is without outflows and unincluded,he
remains unattached and uninvolved.In that sense does a Bodhisattva come to be styled
a ‘great being.’

Sariputra: For what reason is he unattached even to that thought, and uninvolved in it? Subhuti:
Because it is no thought.

Sariputra: Is that thought, which is no thought, something which is? (20) Subhuti: Does there
exist, or can one apprehend, in this state of absence of thought either a ‘there is’ or
a ‘there is not’? Sariputra: No, not that.Subhuti: How then can the Venerable Sariputra say,
‘is that thought, which is no thought, something which is’? Sariputra: Well do you expound
this,you whom the Lord has announced as the foremost of those who dwell in Peace.

Thereupon the Venerable Purna, son of Maitrayani, said to the Lord: ‘Great being,’ one who is
so called, armed with the great armour is that being,he sets out in the great vehicle, is
mounted on the great vehicle.That is why he comes to be styled a ‘great being.’

Subhuti: How great is that which entitles him to be called ‘armed with the great armour’? The
Lord: Here the Bodhisattva, the great being, thinks thus: ‘countless beings should I lead
to Nirvanaand yet there are none who lead to Nirvana,or who should be led to it.’However
many beings he may lead to Nirvana,yet there is not any being that has been led to Nirvana,
nor that has led others to it.For such is the true nature of dharmas, seeing that their
nature is illusory.(21) Just as if, Subhuti, a clever magician, or magician’s apprentice,
were to conjure up at the crossroads a great crowd of people, and then make them vanish again.What
do you think, Subhuti, was anyone killed by anyone, or murdered, or destroyed, or
made to vanish? Subhuti: No indeed, Lord.The Lord: Even so a Bodhisattva, a great being,
leads countless beings to Nirvana,and yet there is not any being that has been led to Nirvana,
nor that has led others to it.To hear this exposition without fear, that is the great
thing which entitles the Bodhisattva to be known as ‘armed with the great armour.’

Subhuti: As I understand the meaning of the Lord’s teaching, as certainly not armed with an
armour should this Bodhisattva, this great being, be known.The Lord: So it is.For all-knowledge
is not made, not unmade, not effected.Those beings also for whose sake he is armed with
the great armour are not made, not unmade, not effected.

Subhuti: So it is.For form, etc., (22) is neither bound nor freed.And that is true also of the
Suchness of form,the Suchness of feeling, etc.

Purna: But what then is that form of which you say that it is neither bound nor freed, and what
is that Suchness of form, etc.?Subhuti: The form of an illusory man is neither bound nor
freed. The Suchness of the form of an illusory man is neither bound nor freed.(23) Because
in reality it is not there at all, because it is isolated, because it is unproduced.This
is the great armour, the great non-armour of a Bodhisattva, a great being, who is armed
with the great armour, who has set out in the great vehicle, who has mounted on the great
vehicle.After these words the Venerable Purna was silent.

