5. The meaning of ‘great vehicle’Subhuti: It is thus, O Lord, that a Bodhisattva, a great being
is armed with the great armour, and becomes one who has set out in the great vehicle,
who has mounted on the great vehicle.But what is that great vehicle? How should one know the
one who has set out in it? From whence will it go forth and whither? Who has set out in
it? Where will it stand? Who will go forth by means of this great vehicle? The Lord: ‘Great
vehicle,’ that is a synonym of immeasurableness.‘Immeasurable’ means infinitude.By means
of the perfections has a Bodhisattva set out in it.From the triple world it will go forth.It
has set out to where there is no objective support.It will be a Bodhisattva, a great
being who will go forth, - but he will not go forth to anywhere.Nor has anyone set out in
it.It will not stand anywhere,but it will stand on all-knowledge, by way of taking its stand
nowhere.[And finally], by means of this great vehicle no one goes forth, no one has gone
forth, no one will go forth.(24) Because neither of these dharmas, - he who would go forth,
and that by which he would go forth – exist, nor can they be got at.Since all dharmas
do not exist, what dharma could go forth by what dharma? It is thus, Subhuti, that a Bodhisattva,
a great being, is armed with the great armour, and has mounted on the great vehicle.

Subhuti: The Lord speaks of the ‘great vehicle.’Surpassing the world with its Gods, men and
Asuras that vehicle will go forth. For it is the same as space, and exceedingly great.As in
space, so in this vehicle there is room for immeasurable and incalculable beings.So is this
the great vehicle of the Bodhisattvas, the great beings.One cannot see its coming, or
going, and its abiding does not exist.Thus one cannot get at the beginning of this great vehicle,
nor at its end, nor at its middle.But it is self-identical everywhere.Therefore one
speaks of a ‘great vehicle.’The Lord: Well said, Subhuti.So it is.It is thus that this is
the great vehicle of the Bodhisattvas, the great beings.Trained therein, Bodhisattvas do
reach all-knowledge, have reached it, will reach it.

Purna: This Elder Subhuti, when asked about perfect wisdom, fancies that the great vehicle is
something that can be pointed out.(25) Subhuti: Have I, O Lord, spoken of the great vehicle
without transgressing against perfect wisdom?The Lord: You have.In agreement with perfect
wisdom you point out the great vehicle.

