3. The saints and their goal are illusionsThereupon the thought came to some of the Gods in
that assembly: What the fairies talk and murmur, that we understand though mumbled. What Subhuti
has just told us, what we do not understand.Subhuti read their thoughts, and said:
There is nothing to understand, nothing at all to understand.For nothing in particular has
been indicated, nothing in particular has been explained.

Thereupon the Gods thought: May the Holy Subhuti enlarge on this! May the Holy Subhuti enlarge
on this!What the Holy Subhuti here explores, demonstrates and teaches, that is remoter
than the remote,subtler than the subtle, deeper than the deep.Subhuti read their thoughts,
and said: No one can attain any of the fruits of the holy life, or keep it, - from the Streamwinner’s
fruit to full enlightenment – (39) unless he patiently accepts the elusiveness
of the dharma.

Then those Gods thought: What should one wish those to be like who are worthy to listen to the
doctrine from the Holy Subhuti? Subhuti read their thoughts, and said: Those who learn
the doctrine from me one should wish to be like an illusory magical creation,for they will
neither hear my words, nor experience the facts which they express.

Gods: Beings that are like a magical illusion, are they not just an illusion? Subhuti: Like
a magical illusion are those beings,like a dream.For not two different things are magical
illusion and beings, are dreams and beings.All objective facts also are like a magical illusion,
like a dream.The various classes of saints, from Streamwinner to Buddhahood, also are
like a magical illusion, like a dream.See the previous recordSee the previous recordSee
the previous recordSee the previous recordSee the previous recordSee the previous record(40)
Gods: A fully enlightened Buddha also, you say, is like a magical illusions, is like a
dream? Buddhahood also, you say, is like a magical illusion, is like a dream? Subhuti: Even
Nirvana, I say, is like a magical illusion, is like a dream. How much more so anything
else!Gods: Even Nirvana, Holy Subhuti, you say, is like an illusion, is like a dream? Subhuti:
Even if perchance there could be anything more distinguished, of that too I would say
that it is like an illusion, like a dream.For not two different things are illusion and Nirvana,
are dreams and Nirvana.

Thereupon the Venerable Sariputra, the Venerable Purna, son of Maitrayani, the Venerable Mahakoshthila,
the Venerable Mahakatyayana, the Venerable Mahakashyapa, and the other Great Disciples,
together with many thousands of Bodhisattvas, said: Who, Subhuti, will be those
who grasp this perfect wisdom as here explained? Thereupon the Venerable Ananda said to those
Elders: Bodhisattvas who cannot fall back will grasp it, or persons who have reached sound
views, or Arhats in whom the outflows have dried up.

Subhuti: No one will grasp this perfect wisdom as here explained [i.e. explained in such a way
that there is really no explanation at all].(41) For no dharma at all has been indicated,
lit up, or communicated.So there will be no one who can grasp it.

