6. The infinitude of perfect wisdomSakra: This perfection of wisdom, Subhuti, is a great perfection,unlimited,measureless,infinite.Subhuti:
So it is.And why? Perfect wisdom is great,unlimited,measurelessand
infinitebecause form, feelings, etc., are so.Hence one does not settle
down in the conviction that this is a ‘great perfection,’an ‘unlimited perfection,’
a ‘measureless perfection,’ and ‘infinite perfection.’That is why perfect wisdom is a great
perfection, unlimited, measureless and infinite.

(46) Perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection because objectsas well as [individual] beings
are infinite.Perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection because one cannot get at the beginning,
middle, or end of any objective fact [since as a dharma it has no own-being].Moreover,
perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection because all objective facts are endless and boundless,
and their beginning, middle, or end are not apprehended.For one cannot apprehend the
beginning, middle and end of form, etc.In that way perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection
by reason of the infinitude of objects.

And further again, a being is endless and boundlessbecause one cannot get at its beginning,
middle or end.Therefore perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection by reason of the infinitude
of beings.Sakra: How is it, Holy Subhuti, that perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection
by reason of the infinitude of beings? Subhuti: It is not so because of their exceedingly
great number and abundance.

Sakra: How then, Holy Subhuti, is perfect wisdom an infinite perfection by reason of the infinitude
of beings? (47) Subhuti: What factual entity does the word ‘being’ denote? Sakra:
The word ‘being’ denotes no dharma or non-dharma.It is a term that has been added on [to what
is really there] as something adventitious,groundless,as nothing in itself,unfounded in
objective fact.Subhuti: Has thereby [i.e., by uttering the word ‘being’] any being been
shown up [as an ultimate fact]? Sakra: No indeed, Holy Subhuti!Subhuti: When no being at all
has been shown up, how can there be an infinitude of them? If a Tathagata, with his voice
of infinite range, with the deep thunder of his voice, should pronounce, for aeons countless
as the sands of the Ganges, the word ‘being,’ ‘being,’ – would he thereby produce, or
stop, any being whatsoever, either in the past, future or present? Sakra: No indeed, Holy
Subhuti!Because a being is pure from the very beginning, perfectly pure.Subhuti: In this
way also perfect wisdom is an infinite perfection by reason of the infinitude of beings.In
this manner also the infinitude of perfect wisdom should be known from the infinitude of
beings.(48,1)

