1. The perfection of wisdom a source of great meritSakra: Let us again consider two people.
The one truly believes in the perfection of wisdom, trustingly confides in it, etc., to:since
their guide will not fail [as p. 62].And when he has heard this exposition, he will resolve
that he will never abandon this perfection of wisdom, - surely so greatly profitable,
so great an advantage, so great a fruit, so great a reward, endowed with so great qualities!
– that he will guard and preserve it, because it is exceedingly hard to get.And he himself
would honour, worship and adore it. The other person would first venerate it, and then
give a copy of it to another son or daughter of a good family, who, desirous of it and
eager, asks for it.(103) Which one of these two persons begets the greater merit, the one
who intends to give it away, or the one who does not? The Lord: I will question you on this
point,and you may answer to the best of your abilities.If one person by himself were to
honour the relics of the Tathagata after his Pairinirvana, minister to them and preserve them;and
if another were not only himself to honour the relics of the Tathagata, minister to
them and revere them, but in addition reveal them to others, give them away, and share them,
in the hope that the worship of the relics would become widespread, from pity for beings;then
which one of these two persons would beget the greater merit: The one who, while
worshipping them himself, reveals, gives and shares with others, or the one who by himself,
singly, worships them? Sakra: The one who shares with others.(104) The Lord: So it is, Kausika.The
person who would give this perfection of wisdom to others, who helps others, who
intends to give it away,he would on the strength of that beget the greater merit.

If in addition he would go to where there are persons who have become fit vessels for this perfection
of wisdom, and would share it with them, then he would beget still more merit.

Moreover, Kausika, great would be the merit of someone who would instigate all beings in Jambudvipa
to observe the ten ways of wholesome action, and would establish them in them? Sakra:
Great it would be.The Lord: Greater would be the merit of someone who would make a copy
of this perfection of wisdom, would believe in it and have faith in it, faith serene and
firm; who would raise his thoughts to enlightenment, and with earnest intention would give
this perfection of wisdom to another Bodhisattva who had raised his thought to enlightenment;
would first of all perfect himself by tireless writing and reciting; then after much
zealous labour, he would persuade the other Bodhisattva, explain this perfection of wisdom
to him, instigate to it, fill with enthusiasm for it, (105) make him rejoice in it, would,
by his words, lead him to it, educate him in it, illuminate its benefits to him, cleanse
his thought and remove his doubts; and who would address him as follows: “Come here, son
of a good family, do train yourself in just this Path of the Bodhisattvas,for as a result
of this training, this coursing, this struggling you will surely quickly awake to full enlightenment.After
that you will educate an infinite number of beings in the complete extinction
of the substratum of rebirth, in other words, in the revelation of the reality-limit.”Because
he intends to give away, therefore his merit is the greater.And this is true even
if it is compared with the merit of someone who establishes in the observation of the ten
wholesome ways of acting all the beings in world systems of any size, (106) even in all
the world systems that there are, numerous as the sands of Ganges River.

(107) Or if it is compared with that of someone who would establish others in the four trances,

the four Unlimited, the four formless attainments, the five superknowledges, in any number of
world systems.

(112) In each case a person who would not only write this perfection of wisdom and recite it
by himself, but would write it for others and give it away to them, would easily beget the
greater merit.

Moreover, Kausika, someone would also beget a greater merit if they were conversant with the
meaning when reciting this perfection of wisdom;and having written it for others, would give
it away, expound and light it up, both the meaning and the letter.

