3. The perfection of wisdom greater than any other spiritual giftAnd that merit would be greater
than if one were to establish beings in any number of world systems in the fruit of a
Streamwinner.

(116) And that holds good also of the fruit of a Once-Returner,

of a Never-Returner,

and of an Arhat.For it is the perfection of wisdom which brings about the fruit of a Once-Returner,
of a Never-Returner, and of an Arhat.(125) And the Bodhisattva will increase his endurance
by the reflection that by training himself in the perfection of wisdom, he will by
and by become one who obtains the dharmas which constitute a Buddha, and will get near to
full enlightenment.

For he knows that by training himself in this training, coursing in it, struggling in it, he
will bring forth all the fruits of the holy life, from that of a Streamwinner to Buddhahood.The
merit of the person who shares the perfection of wisdom will also be greater than that
of one who establishes in Pratyekabuddhahood any number of beings in any number of world
systems.

[128] Moreover, Kausika, if someone were to raise to full enlightenment the hearts of as many
beings as there are in Jambudvipa; and if someone else were not only to raise their hearts
to full enlightenment, but would also in addition give them a copy of this perfection of
wisdom; or, if he would present a copy of this perfection of wisdom to an irreversible Bodhisattva,
in the hope that he will let himself be trained in it, (129) make endeavours about
it, develop it, and as a result of the growth, increase, and abundance of the perfection
of wisdom, fulfil the Buddha-dharmas; then, compared with that former person, he will
beget the greater merit, for certainly he will, once he has awoken to full enlightenment,
end the sufferings of beings. And his merit will be greater, even if the other person raises
to full enlightenment the hearts of any number of beings in any number of world systems.

(130) Or, let us again compare two persons: The first would present a copy of this perfection
of wisdom to any number of beings in any number of world systems who have become irreversible
from full enlightenment, who have definitely set out for it; the second would in addition
expound it to them, according to the meaning and according to the letter.

Would he not on the strength of that beget much merit? (131) Sakra: His merit would indeed be
great.One could not easily even calculate that heap of merit,or count it, or find anything
that it is similar to, that it resembles, or that it can be compared with.

The Lord: Still greater would be the merit of someone who in addition would instruct and admonish
in this perfection of wisdom those irreversible Bodhisattvas who want more quickly to
win full enlightenment.(133) And further, still another Bodhisattva would arise, who would
say that he would win full enlightenment more quickly than they.If someone would instruct
and admonish in the perfection of wisdom that Bodhisattva of quicker understanding, he
would beget a still greater merit.

Sakra: To the extent that a Bodhisattva comes nearer to full enlightenment, to that extent he
should be instructed and admonished in the perfection of wisdom, for that brings him nearer
and nearer to Suchness.When he comes nearer to Suchness, he confers many fruits and advantages
on those who have done him services, i.e., on those through whom he enjoys his robes,
alms-bowl, lodging, and medicinal appliances for sickness.His merit now becomes still
greater,in consequence of the fact that he comes nearer to full enlightenment.

(134) Subhuti: Well said, Kausika. You fortify those who belong to the Bodhisattva-vehicle,
help them, stand by them.Even so should you act. A holy disciple who wants to give help to
all beings, he fortifies the Bodhisattvas in their attitude to full enlightenment, helps
them, stands by them. It is so that one should act.For begotten from the perfection of wisdom
is the full enlightenment of the Bodhisattvas.Because, if the Bodhisattvas would not produce
that thought of enlightenment, they would not train themselves in full enlightenment,
nor in the six perfections, and in consequence they would not awake to full enlightenment.But
because the Bodhisattvas train themselves in the Bodhisattva-training, in these six
perfections, therefore do they produce this thought of enlightenment, therefore do they awake
to full enlightenment.

Chapter VI Dedication and jubilation

