3. A metaphysical problemNow, as concerns these foundations through which the person belonging
to the Bodhisattva-vehicle has rejoiced, concerning those objective supports and points
of view, through which he has raised that thought, - would those foundations, objective supports
and points of view he apprehended in such a way that they would be treated as signs?
Maitreya: No, they would not.(139) Subhuti: If he treated as an objective support or as
a sign that foundation which does not exist, and that objective support which does not exist,
would he then not have a perverted perception, perverted thought, perverted views? For
in a greedy person also, when he has discriminated a nonexisting entity [foundation] and
pondered on it – thinking that there is permanence in the impermanent, ease in suffering,
the self in what is not the self, loveliness in what is repulsive – there arises a perverted
perception, perverted thought, perverted view.And as the foundation [entity], the objective
support, the point of view [are non-existent], so is enlightenment, so is the thought
[of enlightenment] and so all dharmas, all elements.But then on which foundations, by which
objective supports, or points of view does he turn over what thought into full enlightenment,
or what meritorious work founded on jubilation does he turn over into what utmost,
right and perfect enlightenment?

Maitreya: This should not be taught or expounded in front of a Bodhisattva who has newly set
out in the vehicle.For he would lose that little faith, which is his, that little affection,
serenity and respect which are his.In front of an irreversible Bodhisattva should this
be taught and expounded.Alternatively, a Bodhisattva who is propped up by a good friend would
thereby not be cowed, nor become stolid, nor cast down, nor depressed, would not turn
his mind away from it, nor have his back broken, nor tremble, be frightened, be terrified.(140)
And thus should the Bodhisattva turn over into all-knowledge the meritorious work founded
on jubilation.

Subhuti: The thought by which one has rejoiced and turned over, or dedicated that [wholesome
root connected with jubilation], - that thought of [rejoicing] is [at the time of turning
over] extinct, stopped, departed, reversed.Therefore, what is that thought by which one turns
over to full enlightenment? Or what is that thought which turns over into full enlightenment
the meritorious work founded on jubilation? Or, if no two thoughts can ever meet,
how can one by thought turn over, or dedicate, thought? Nor is it possible to turn over [or
to overturn, to transform] that thought as far as its own being is concerned.

Sakra: The Bodhisattvas who have newly set out in the vehicle should beware of being afraid
when they have heard this exposition. How then should a Bodhisattva turn that meritorious
work founded on jubilation over into full enlightenment? And how does someone who takes hold
of the meritorious work founded on jubilation succeed in taking hold of that thought connected
with jubilation, and how does one who turns over the thought connected with jubilation
succeed in turning it over?

Thereupon, the Venerable Subhuti turned his mind to the Bodhisattva Maitreya, concentrated his
mind on him, and spoke thus (141,1): Here the Bodhisattva considers the merit connected
with the past Buddhas and Lords, in the way we described before [i.e. 135-38]. He piles up
the wholesome roots of all those, all that quantity of wholesome roots without exception
and remainder, rolls it into one lump, weighs it, and rejoices over it.He then turns the
meritorious work founded on jubilation over to full enlightenment. (142) How can the Bodhisattva
when he turns over, be without perverted perception, perverted thought, perverted view?

