4. Like space or an echoSubhuti: It is wonderful, O Lord, how deep is this dharma, I mean the
perfection of wisdom.Demonstration does not diminish or increase it.Non-demonstration also
does not diminish or increase it.The Lord: Well said, Subhuti.It is just as if a Tathagata
should, during his entire life, speak in praise of space, without thereby increasing the
volume of space;and space would not diminish, either, while he was not speaking in praise
of it.Or it is as with an illusory man. Praise does not penetrate into him or win him over.
When there is no praise he is not affected, or frustrated.Just so the true nature of
dharmas is just so much, whether it be demonstrated or not.

Subhuti: A doer of what is hard is the Bodhisattva who, while he courses in perfect wisdom,
does not lose heart nor get elated;who persists in making endeavours about it and does not
turn back.The development of perfect wisdom is like the development of space.Homage should
be paid to those Bodhisattvas who are armed with this armour.For with space they want to
be armed when, for the sake of beings, they put on the armour.Armed with the great armour
is a Bodhisattva,a hero is a Bodhisattva, when he wants to be armed with an armour, and win
full enlightenment, for the sake of beings who are like space, who are like the realm of
dharma.He is one who wants to liberate space,he is one who wants to get rid of space,he
is one who has won the armour of the great perfection of vigour (197,1), that Bodhisattva
who is armed with the armour for the sake of beings who are like space, who are like the realm
of Dharma.

Thereupon a certain monk saluted the Lord with folded hands and said to the Lord: I pay homage,
O Lord, to the perfection of wisdom!For it neither produces nor stops any dharma.

Sakra: If someone, holy Subhuti, would make efforts about this perfection of wisdom, what would
his efforts be about? Subhuti: He would make efforts about space.And he would make his
efforts about a mere vacuity if he would decide to train in perfect wisdom or to work on
it.

Sakra: Please, O Lord, command me to shelter,defend and protect that son or daughter of good
family who bears in mind this perfection of wisdom!Subhuti: Sakra, can you see that dharma
which you intend to shelter, defend and protect? Sakra: Not so, holy Subhuti.Subhuti: So
when a Bodhisattva stands in the perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded, then just
that will be his shelter, defence and protection.On the other hand, when he is lacking in
perfect wisdom, (198) then those men and ghosts who look for entry will gain entrance into
him.One would, however, want to arrange shelter, defence and protection for space if one
would want to arrange shelter, defence and protection for a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect
wisdom.What do you think, Kausika, are you able to arrange shelter, defence and protection
for an echo? Sakra: Not so, holy Subhuti.Subhuti: Just so a Bodhisattva, who courses
and dwells in perfect wisdom, comprehends that all dharmas are like an echo.He does not
think about them, does not review, identify, or perceive them,and he knows that those dharmas
do not exist, that their reality does not appear, cannot be found, cannot be got at.If
he dwells thus, he courses in perfect wisdom.

