1. Depth and purity of perfect wisdomSubhuti: It is hard to gain confidence in the perfection
of wisdom if one is unpractised, lacks in wholesome roots and is in the hands of a bad friend.The
Lord: So it is, Subhuti.It is hard to gain confidence in the perfection of wisdom
if one is unpractised, has only diminutive wholesome roots, is dull-witted, does not care,
has learned little, has an inferior kind of wisdom, relies on bad friends, is not eager
to learn, unwilling to ask questions and unpractised in wholesome dharmas.

Subhuti: How deep then is this perfection of wisdom, since it is so hard to gain confidence
in it? The Lord: Form is neither bound nor freed,because form has no own-being.The past starting
point of material process [= form] is neither bound nor freed,because the past starting
point of a material process is without own-being.The end of a material process, in the
future, is neither bound nor freed,because the future end of a material process is without
own-being.A present material process is without own-being,because the fact of being present
is not a part of the own-being of a present form.(186) And so for the remaining skandhas.

Subhuti: It is hard, it is exceedingly hard to gain confidence in the perfection of wisdom,
if one is unpractised, has planted no wholesome roots, is in the hands of a bad friend, has
come under the sway of Mara, is lazy, of small vigour, robbed of mindfulness and stupid.The
Lord: So it is, Subhuti.Because the purity of form is identical with the purity of the
fruit, and the purity of the fruit is identical with the purity of form.It is thus that the
purity of form and the purity of the fruit are not two, nor divided, are not broken apart,
nor cut apart.It is thus that the purity of form comes from the purity of the fruit, and
the purity of the fruit from the purity of form.(187) And the same identity exists between
the purity of form and the purity of all-knowledge.The same applies to the other skandhas.

Sariputra: Deep, O Lord, is the perfection of wisdom!The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: A source
of illumination is the perfection of wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: A light is
perfect wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Not subject to rebirth is perfect wisdom.The
Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Free from defilement is perfect wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra:
There is no attainment or reunion in perfect wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra:
Perfect wisdom does not reproduce herself.The Lord: From purity.(188) Sariputra:
There is absolutely no rebirth of perfect wisdom, whether in the world of sense-desire, or
in the world of form, or in the formless world.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Perfect
wisdom neither knows or perceives.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: What then does perfect
wisdom neither know nor perceive? The Lord: Form, and the other skandhas.And why? From purity.Sariputra:
Perfect wisdom neither helps nor hinders all-knowledge. The Lord: From purity.Sariputra:
Perfect wisdom neither gains nor abandons any dharma. The Lord: From purity.Subhuti:
The purity of form, etc., is due to the purity of self. The Lord: Because it is absolutely
pure.(189) Subhuti: The purity of the fruit, and the purity of all-knowledge, are
due to the purity of self. The Lord: Because of its absolute purity.Subhuti: The absence
of attainment and reunion is due to the purity of self. The Lord: Because of its absolute
purity.Subhuti: The boundlessness of form, etc., is due to the boundlessness of self. The
Lord: Because of its absolute purity.Subhuti: A Bodhisattva who understands it thus, he has
perfect wisdom. The Lord: Because of his absolute purity.Subhuti: Moreover, this perfection
of wisdom does not stand on the shore this side, nor on the shore beyond, nor athwart
the two.The Lord: Because of its absolute purity.

(190) Subhuti: A Bodhisattva who treats even that [insight] as an object of perception, will
thereby part from this perfection of wisdom, and get far away from it.

