6. More discord between teacher and pupilFurthermore, the teacher may be a monk who is fond
of solitudewhile the pupils prefer a communal life.He will tell them that he will give this
perfection of wisdom to those who come to where he is,but not to those who do not.In their
desire and zeal for the dharma which they value they go to where the teacher is, and still
he gives them no opportunity to learn anything. He is one who is eager for trifling bits
of fleshy things, but they do not want to give him anything that he values.(247) Wherever
he goes he will be short of food, surrounded by troubles, and in danger of his life.And
his pupils will hear from others that that place is short of food, full of troublesand dangers
to life.And that teacher will say to those sons of good family: “This place is short
of food.Of course, sons of good family, you may come here if you wish. But I am afraid that
you will regret having come.” This is a subtle device by which he rejects them.In disgust
they will interpret these remarks as signs of refusal, not as signs of a desire to give.Convinced
that he does not want to give, they will not go to where he is.

Moreover, the teacher may have set out for a spot where there is danger from vermin, from beasts
of prey, from ghosts.And he will move from there to a wild place with beasts of prey,
snakes and robbers, marked by drought and famine.To those prospective pupils he will say:
“You are aware, I suppose, that in this spot for which we have set out there are many dangers,
from vermin, beasts of prey, flesh-eating ghosts, that it is swarming with snakes and
robbers, that it has neither food nor water.So you must be able to experience a great deal
of suffering.” Thus he will reject them through a subtle device.Disgusted, they will not
go with him, and turn back.

(248) Finally, the teacher may be one of the monks who attach weight to their relations with
the friendly families who feed them.All the time he goes to see them,he is kept very busy
that way, and refuses those prospective pupils on the ground that, “first of all, there is
someone I must go and see.”This also will be a source of discord when this perfection of
wisdom is being written and studied.This also is Mara’s work.

In such ways Mara will bestir himself to prevent people from learning, studying, teaching and
writing this perfection of wisdom.Therefore then, Subhuti, all the factors which prevent
cooperation between teacher and pupil should be recognized as Mara’s deeds, and one should
try to avoid them.

7. Mara dissuades from perfect wisdomSubhuti: What then, O Lord, is the reason why Mara makes
great efforts and bestirs himself to prevent, by this or that device, people from learning
and studying this perfection of wisdom? (249) The Lord: Perfect wisdom is the source of
the all-knowledge of the Buddhas, the Lords.And that in its turn is the source of the religion
of the Tathagatas,which leads immeasurable and incalculable beings to forsake their
defilements.But to those who have forsaken the defilements, Mara cannot gain entry,and that
makes him distressed and dispirited, and the dart of sorrow vexes him.In consequence, when
this perfection of wisdom is being written and studied, he makes in his great tribulation
a great effortand bestirs himself, with this or that device, to prevent the study of this
perfection of wisdom.

Mara, the Evil One, will, moreover, come along in the guise of a Shramana, and cause dissension.In
order to dissuade the sons of good family who have but recently set out in the vehicle
he will say: “Not is that the perfection of wisdom which your Honours listen to.As it
has been handed down in my Sutras, as it is included in my Sutras, that is the perfection
of wisdom.”Thus he will sow doubts in the minds of Bodhisattva who have but recently set out
in the vehicle, whose intelligence is small, sluggish and limited, who are blind, and whose
future enlightenment has not yet been predicted.Seized by doubt they will not learn,
study or write this perfection of wisdom.(250) This also Mara does to them.

Moreover, Mara may come along in the guise of a Buddha, with magically created monks around
him, and maintain that a Bodhisattva who courses in deep dharmas is one who realises the reality-limit,who
becomes a Disciple, and not a Bodhisattva, as this Bodhisattva.This also
is one of Mara’s deeds.

Subhuti, when this perfection of wisdom is being written and studied, Mara, the Evil One, produces
these deeds, which I have mentioned, and many others also.They all should be recognized
by a Bodhisattva,and avoided,not cultivated.The Bodhisattva should reply to them with
vigour, mindfulness and self-possession.

