3. How the Tathagata knows the thoughts of beings [(cm :: Conze 1975: 173, fn.: *The following
disquisition is quite unintelligible as it stands. I have therefore freely interpolated
the comments of Haribhadra’s commentary.)]Moreover, Subhuti, thanks to this perfection of
wisdom the Tathagata wisely knows immeasurable and incalculable beings as they really are.And
that through the absence of own-being in beings.(257) The Tathagata also knows wisely
the thoughts and doings of immeasurable and incalculable beings, since beings have no real
existence [as separate individualities].

Moreover, the Tathagata, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, wisely knows as they really are
the collected thoughts of countless beings as ‘collected thoughts.’And how does the Tathagata
know them? He wisely sees that collectedness is equivalent to extinction [of the individual
thought which, empirically speaking, has ceased to exist, being merged into the absolute].
And also that that extinction is [if we consider its true reality], just non-extinction.

Furthermore the Tathagata wisely knows the distracted thoughts of beings for what they are.For
he wisely knows that thoughts are distracted [by the objects of the external world because
no attention is paid to] the realm of Dharma.On the other hand he knows that those thoughts,
as they really are in ultimate reality, are without marks, do not get extinguished
[from moment to moment], that their continuity is not interrupted, and that they are not really
distracted [because they cannot, in actual fact, be directed on external objects].

(258) The Tathagata knows the infinite and inexhaustible minds of beings.For the Tathagata in
his great compassion, has willed a mind by which he wisely knows as it really is that “in
the likeness of the immeasurable inextinction of space should the immeasurable inextinction
of the minds of all beings be understood.” And that mind of the Buddha is never stopped,
it was never produced, it has no duration in between production and stopping, it gives
no support, it is infinite, since it cannot be measured, and it is inexhaustible, like the
realm of Dharma itself.The Tathagata knows the polluted minds of beings for what they are.

For he knows that the minds of ordinary people are not actually polluted by the polluting forces
of perverted views, which, being nothing but wrong ideas, do not really find a place
in them.

(259) The Tathagata knows unpolluted thoughts for what they are.For he knows that those minds
are transparently luminous in their essential original nature.

The Tathagata knows slack thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that those thoughts
are in reality unable to slouch on any resting place.

The Tathagata knows tensely active thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that thoughts
are exerted so as to win dispassion, and that they can no longer be exerted when there
is nothing left that can be seized upon.

The Tathagata knows (260) thoughts with outflows for what they really are.For he knows that
those thoughts are without own-being, that they are just a false representation of what is
not.The Tathagata knows thoughts without outflows for what they really are.For he knows that
these thoughts lead to the non-existence [of the outflows] and that [when a continuity
is quite pure], there is nothing they can be directed to.

The Tathagata knows greedy thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that a greedy mind
is not a mind as it really is, and that a mind as it really is is not a greedy mind.

(261) That Tathagata knows minds free from greed for what they really are.For he knows that
a mind from which greed departs is not a greedy mind, and that the true reality of a mind
which forsakes greed is not a greedy mind, because it gets detached from greed.

And as the Tathagata wisely knows the minds that are greedy and free from greed, so he knows,
in the same manner, the minds that are with hate

and that are without hate,

that are with delusion,

and that are without delusion.

(263) The Tathagata also knows the scant thoughts of beings for what they really are.For he
knows that those thoughts are not joined up with the world of appearance, that they are not
included in the world of appearance.

The Tathagata knows extensive or abundant thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that
those thoughts do neither diminish nor increase; that those thoughts do not depart, because
they cannot possibly do so [as they are essentially identical with the realm of Dharma,
and have nowhere outside that to go to].

The Tathagata knows thoughts which have not gone great for what they really are.For he knows
that those thoughts have not come, that they do not go away, and that their reality is not
included in the present, either.

(264) The Tathagata knows thoughts that have gone great for what they really are.For he knows
that those thoughts are all the same in ultimate Sameness, and that, in addition, they are
all the same in their own-being [i.e. mere illusion].

The Tathagata knows thoughts that have become unlimited for what they really are.For he knows
that those thoughts have become unlimited because they have ceased to lean on anything.

The Tathagata knows thoughts with perceptible attributes for what they really are.For he knows
that all those thoughts look at the same thing, and that in their own-being they are all
thoughts (265,1).

The Tathagata knows thoughts without perceptible attributes for what they really are.For he
knows that that thought, since it is itself without marks, and isolated from its object, is
imperceptible, and does not come within the range of the three, or even all the five, kinds
of vision.

The Tathagata knows reacting thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that those thoughts
represent what is not really there, that they are empty, devoid of objective support.

The Tathagata knows non-reacting thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that those thoughts
are non-dual, (266) and that, ultimately unreal, they only seem to arrive at some
reality.

That Tathagata knows lower thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that in the true reality
of lower thoughts there is no self-conceited imagining.

The Tathagata knows supreme thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that those thoughts
are unimpeded, because not even the least thought has been apprehended.

The Tathagata knows unconcentrated thoughts for what they really are.(267) For he knows that
those thoughts are the same in that they take hold of differences; [directed toward a faulty
presentation of a world of separate things they are distracted, and] they do not achieve
a synthesis; in that sense they are unconcentrated.

The Tathagata knows concentrated thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that those thoughts
are the same in the self-identical realm of dharma, and that, by undoing all distractions,
they do achieve synthesis, and that is in this sense that they are concentrated thoughts,
the same as space.

The Tathagata knows unemancipated thoughts for what they really are.For he knows that those
thoughts are, in their own-being, already now emancipated, for they have non-existence for
own-being.

(268) The Tathagata knows emancipated thoughts for what they really are.For the Tathagata has
not apprehended any thought as past, as future, or as present, because thought is not really
there.

The Tathagata knows imperceptible thoughts for what they really are.For he knows with regard
to that thought that, because it is not really there, it cannot be perceived; that, because
it has no reality, it cannot be discerned;that, because it falls short of the perfect reality,
it cannot be grasped, - not by the eye of wisdom, not by the heavenly eye,how much
less by the fleshly eye, since it does not come within the range of any of them.

Furthermore, the Tathagata wisely knows, for what they really are, the tendencies of countless
beings to make positive and negative statements about objects.For he knows (269) that all
these ideas arise in dependence on form, and the other skandhas.How has he discerned the
dependence on the skandhas of those positive and negative statements? If we take such statements
as – ‘The Tathagata continues to exist after death,’‘The Tathagata does not continue
to exist after death,’‘The Tathagata does and does not continue to exist after death,’‘The
Tathagata neither does nor does not continue to exist after death’– then these statements
refer to the skandhas only [and they have no basis in the true reality of the Tathagata].The
same holds good of similar statements, i.e. when one says: ‘Eternal are self and the
world, - just that is the truth, everything else is delusion.’And so if one maintains that
self and the world are non-eternal,both eternal and non-eternal,neither eternal nor non-eternal.(270)
Or, similarly, if one maintains that self and the world are finite,or not
finite,or both finite and not finite,or neither finite nor not finite.Or, finally, if one
says ‘that which is the soul, that is the body,’or ‘one thing is the soul, another the body,’all
these statements refer only to the skandhas.

It is thanks to the perfection of wisdom that the Tathagata knows those positive and negative
statements for what they really are.(271) The Tathagata cognizes the skandhas as identical
with Suchness.That is why He knows, thanks to perfect wisdom, those positive and negative
statements for what they really are.It is thus that the Tathagata makes known Suchness
through the Suchness of the Tathagata, through the Suchness of the skandhas, through the Suchness
of the positive and negative statements.And just that Suchness of the skandhas, that
is also the Suchness of the world.For it has been said by the Tathagata that “the five
skandhas are reckoned as the ‘world.’”Therefore then, Subhuti, that which is the Suchness
of the skandhas, that is the Suchness of the world;that which is the Suchness of the world,
that is the Suchness of all dharmas;that which is the Suchness of all dharmas that is the
Suchness of the fruit of a Streamwinner,and so on, up to:that is the Suchness of Pratyekabuddhahood,
that is the Suchness of the Tathagata.In consequence all this Suchness, - the
Suchness of the Tathagata, of the skandhas, of all dharmas, of all holy Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas
- is just one single Suchness, is without any trace of the variety of positivity
and negativity, as being one, non-different, inextinguishable, unaffected, non-dual, without
cause for duality.(272) That is this Suchness which the Tathagata has, thanks to the
perfection of wisdom, fully known.It is thus that perfect wisdom instructs the Tathagata
in this world.It is thus that the Tathagata shows up the world to this infatuated world for
what it really is.And thus a vision of this world takes place. It is thus that perfect
wisdom is the mother of the Tathagatas, who has generated them.It is thus that the Tathagata,
after he has been enlightened as to Suchness, cognizes the Suchness of the world, its
Non-falseness, its unaltered Suchness.And in consequence, just because he has been enlightened
about Suchness [tathatā] is the Tathagata called a ‘Tathagata.’

Subhuti: Deep, O Lord, is Suchness.The enlightenment of the Buddhas, the Lords, is brought about
and revealed through it.Who else could firmly believe in it, except an irreversible Bodhisattva,
or an Arhat whose intentions are fulfilled, or a person who has achieved right
views? These extremely deep stations were therefore described by the Tathagata after he had
been enlightened to them.The Lord: So it is, Subhuti.For this Suchness which the Tathagata
has fully known, is inexhaustible, and he has described it as inexhaustible after he had
fully known it.

