1. Five attributes of perfect wisdomSubhuti: Deep, O Lord, is perfect wisdom.Certainly as a
great enterprise has this perfection of wisdom been set up,as an unthinkable, incomparable,
immeasurable, incalculable enterprise, as an enterprise which equals the unequalled.The
Lord: So it is, Subhuti.And why is it an unthinkable enterprise? Because unthinkable are Tathagatahood,
Buddhahood, Self-existence, and the state of all-knowledge.And on these one
cannot reflect with one’s thought,since they cannot be an object of thought, or of volition,
or of any of the dharmas which constitute thought.And why is it an incomparable enterprise?
Because one cannot reflect on Tathagatahood, etc., nor compare it.And why is it immeasurable?
(278) Because Tathagatahood, etc., is immeasurable.And why is it incalculable? Because
Tathagatahood, etc., is incalculable.And why is it an enterprise which equals the unequalled?
Because nothing can be equal to the Tathagata, to the fully Enlightened One, to
the Self-existent, to the All-knowing, how much less can anything be superior to him?

Subhuti: Do these five attributes apply only to Tathagatahood, etc., or also to the skandhas,
and to all dharmas? The Lord: They apply to them also.Also the skandhas,and also all dharmas
are unthinkable.For with regard to the true essential nature of form, etc., there is
no thought, nor volition, nor any of the dharmas which constitute thought, nor any comparing.For
that reason the skandhasand all dharmas are (279) also unthinkable and incomparable.They
are also immeasurable, because one cannot conceive of a measure of form, etc., since
such a measure does not exist, in consequence of the infinitude of all dharmas.They are also
incalculable,because they have risen above all possibility of counting.They are also equal
to the unequalled,because all dharmas are the same as space.What do you think, Subhuti,
does there exist with reference to space any sameness, or counting or measure, or comparison,
or thought, or a dharma which constitutes thought? Subhuti: No, Lord.(280) The Lord:
In like manner also all dharmas are unthinkable, incomparable, immeasurable, incalculable,
equal to the unequalled.For they are Tathagata-dharmas. But those Tathagata-dharmas are
unthinkable because all thought has ceased, and incomparable because they have completely
risen above all comparison.By the words ‘unthinkable’ and ‘incomparable’ are denoted all
the objects which belong to consciousness.And so with ‘immeasurable,’ ‘incalculable’ and ‘equal
to the unequalled.’ Because all measure, calculation and sameness have ceased are the
Tathagata-dharmas immeasurable, incalculable, equal to the unequalled.They are immeasurable,
incalculable, equal to the unequalled because their immeasurableness and incalculability
is the same as that of space. These dharmas are incomparable in the same sense in which
space is incomparable.These dharmas can certainly not be placed side by side,and that is
why they cannot be compared.These dharmas are unthinkable,incomparable,immeasurable,incalculable,equal
to the unequalled in the same sense that space has these attributes.

