3. No objective supports and no own-beingSariputra: If as a result of such conscious reflections
the deed of that man is added on to his collection of karma, then the deed of the Buddha,
the Lord, when he, thinking to himself, consciously forms the notion that he wants to
enter extinction,(358) will also be added to the Buddha’s heap and collection of karma? Subhuti:
No, indeed not, Sariputra.For the Tathagata is one who has forsaken all reflections
and discriminations.Space on its own cannot raise a deed or a thought without the help of
an objective support.A deed can arise only with an objective support, not without one.A
thought can arise only with an objective support, not without one.Intellectual acts must refer
to dharmas which are seen, heard, felt, or known.In respect of some objects intellectual
acts take defilement upon themselves, in respect of others purification.Acts of will and
deeds can therefore arise only with objective support, not without.Sariputra: Since the
Lord has described all objective supports as isolated [without an inherent relation to a
subject], how can an act of will arise only with objective support, and not without? Subhuti:
An act of will is raised only with an objective support, and not without, in the sense
that one treats an actually non-existent objective support as a sign, as an objective support.In
fact also the act of will is isolated, and also the sign.And so are Karma-formations
which are conditioned by ignorance, and so all the links of conditioned co-production,
up to decay and death conditioned by birth.Even so objective supports are isolated.The act
of will is isolated from the sign [which seems to cause it], and it arises only in reference
to the conventional expressions current in the world.

Sariputra: If in his dreams a Bodhisattva gives a gift, and dedicates it to full enlightenment,can
that gift be called effectively dedicated? (359) Subhuti: We are face to face with
Maitreya, the Bodhisattva, the great being.The Tathagata has predicted his supreme enlightenment.He
is a direct eyewitness of this matter,he will dispose of this matter.Sariputra:
Subhuti the Elder, Maitreya, has said: “There is Maitreya, the Bodhisattva, the great being!He
will dispose of this matter.”Dispose of this matter, Venerable Ajita!Maitreya:With reference
to what the Venerable Subhuti has said, what corresponds to those words “Maitreya”
and “he will dispose of this matter”? Will my form reply? Or my feeling, perception, impulses,
or consciousness? Will my outward appearance reply, or my shape? Or will the emptiness
of form reply, or the emptiness of feeling, perception, impulses, or consciousness? Obviously
the emptiness of form, etc., does not have the capacity to reply.(360) Nor do I see
any dharma which could reply,or which should reply,or by which one could reply,or any dharma
which has been predicted to the supreme enlightenment.

Sariputra: Maitreya, have you then perhaps really witnessed those dharmas in the way in which
you teach? Maitreya: I have not.Even I do not know those dharmas, do not apprehend, do not
see them, in the way in which my words express, and my thoughts reflect on them.But certainly
the body could not touch them, speech could not express them, mind could not consider
them.That is the own-being of all dharmas, because they are without any own-being.Sariputra
thought: Deeply wise, indeed, is this Bodhisattva Maitreya the great being. How he expounds
the perfection of wisdom in which he has coursed for such a long time!

The Lord: Why did that thought occur to you? Can you, Sariputra, see that dharma endowed with
which you have been made into an Arhat? Sariputra: No, Lord.(361) The Lord: In the same
way it does not occur to a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wisdom, that “this dharma has
been predestined to full enlightenment, that dharma will be predestined, that dharma is
being predestined, that dharma will know full enlightenment.”When he courses in such a way,
then he courses in perfect wisdom.

