2. No developmentSubhuti: Deep is this conditioned coproduction!

The Lord: Subhuti, will that [first] thought which has stopped [after its momentary appearance]
be again produced [at the time of the second thought]? Subhuti: No Lord.The Lord: That
thought which has [in the past] been produced, is that by its very nature doomed to stop?
Subhuti: Yes it is, O Lord.The Lord: If something is by its very nature doomed to stop, will
that be destroyed? Subhuti: No, Lord.(354) The Lord: That thought which has [not yet]
been produced, is that by its very nature doomed to stop? Subhuti: No, Lord [because something
which has not been produced cannot be stopped].The Lord: But when it comes to the point
when by its own nature it is doomed to stop, will it then be destroyed? Subhuti: No, Lord.The
Lord: If the essential nature of that thought involves neither production nor stopping,
will that then be stopped? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: If a dharma is, by its essential
original nature, stopped already in its own-being, will that dharma be stopped? Subhuti:
No, Lord.The Lord: Will the true nature of dharmas be stopped? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord:
Will the Bodhisattva stand firm in the same way in which Suchness stands firm? Subhuti:
Yes, he will.(355) The Lord: Will then that Suchness not be in danger of being changed away
from its overtowering immobility? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Deep is Suchness. Subhuti:
It is deep, O Lord.The Lord: Is thought in Suchness? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Is thought
[identical with] Suchness? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Is thought other than Suchness?
Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Can you see a Suchness? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: One who courses
like unto Suchness, he courses in the deep? Subhuti: He courses nowhere at all.For
any ideas as to his own performance habitually neither proceed in him, nor befall him.The
Lord: Where does a Bodhisattva course when he courses in perfect wisdom? (356) Subhuti: In
ultimate reality.The Lord: When coursing in ultimate reality does he course in a sign? Subhuti:
No, Lord.The Lord: Is then the sign to him something which he has not undone by meditational
development? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Does then the sign become to the Bodhisattva
who courses in perfect wisdom, something which he has undone by his meditational development?
Subhuti: That Bodhisattva does not make any efforts, while he courses in the course
of a Bodhisattva, to reach in this present birth the state in which all signs are forsaken.If
he were to reach that state before all Buddha-dharmas are complete in him, he would
automatically become a Disciple.The skill in means of a Bodhisattva consists in this, that
he cognizes that sign, both its mark and cause, and yet he surrenders himself completely
to the Signless [realm of dharma, in which no sign has ever arisen].

Sariputra: Does a Bodhisattva’s perfect wisdom increase when in his dreams he develops the three
doors to deliverance, i.e. the Empty, the Signless and the Wishless? Subhuti: If it increases
through development by day, then it also increases in one who dreams [about it].For
the Lord has said that dream and waking are indiscriminate, [essentially the same].If (357)
a Bodhisattva who has received perfect wisdom, day by day courses in perfect wisdom,
then he also in his dreams remains quite close to perfect wisdom, and develops it even then
in abundance.Sariputra: If someone in his dreams does a deed, wholesome or unwholesome,
will that be added on to the heap or collection of his karma? Subhuti: In so far as the Lord
has taught that ultimately all dharmas are like a dream, in so far [i.e. from the standpoint
of ultimate reality] that deed will not be added to his heap or collection of karma.But
on the other hand [from the standpoint of empirical reality], that deed will be added
to the heap and collection of his karma if, after the man has woken up, he thinks the dream
over, and consciously forms the notion that he wants to kill someone.How does he do that?
During his dream he may have taken life, and after he has woken up, he thinks it over like
this: “it is good that he was killed! It is right that he was killed! It was just that
he was killed! It was I who killed him.” Such thoughts are equivalent to the conscious notion
that he wants to kill someone.

