2. How a bodhisattva helps beingsSubhuti: Doers of what is hard are the Bodhisattvas who have
set out to win full enlightenment.Thanks to the practice of the six perfections, as described
above, they do not wish to attain release in a private Nirvana of their own.They survey
the highly painful world of beings. They want to win full enlightenment, and yet they
do not tremble at birth-and-death.The Lord: So it is.Doers of what is hard are the Bodhisattvas
who have set out for the benefit and happiness of the world, out of pity for it. “We
will become a shelter for the world, a refuge, the place of rest, the final relief, islands,
lights and leaders of the world. We will win full enlightenment, and become the resort
of the world,” – with these words they make a vigorous effort to win such a full enlightenment.
(294,1)1. How then do the Bodhisattvas awakened to full enlightenment become the world’s
shelter? They protect from all the sufferings which belong to birth-and-death, they
struggle and make efforts to rid the world of them.2. How do they become the world’s refuge?
They set free from birth, decay, illness, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness and
despair those beings who are doomed to undergo these conditions.3. How do they become the
world’s resting place? The Tathagatas demonstrate Dharma to beings so that they may learn
not to embrace anything.Subhuti: How does that non-embracing come about? The Lord: The non-embracing
of form, etc., is the same as its non-connection,and as its non-production and
non-stopping.(295) One thus learns not to embrace anything as a result of the cognition and
vision that all dharmas are non-embracing, non-connected.4. How do they become the world’s
final relief? The state beyond form is not form;and yet, as the Beyond, so form, etc.,and
all dharmas.Subhuti: If form, etc., and all dharmas are the Beyond, then surely the Bodhisattvas
must fully know all dharmas.Because there is no discrimination between them.The
Lord: So it is.In that Beyond there is no discrimination.Through their non-discrimination
do all dharmas become fully known to the Bodhisattvas.This also is most hard for the Bodhisattvas
that they meditate on all dharmas, but neither realize (296,1), nor become cowed,
and that they meditate thus: “In this way should all these dharmas be fully known; and thus,
awakened to full enlightenment, will we demonstrate these dharmas, and reveal them.”5.
How do they become the world’s islands? ‘Islands’ are pieces of land limited by water, in
rivers or great lakes.Just so form, etc., is limited at its beginning and end,and so are
all dharmas.But the limitation of all dharmas is the same as the Calm Quiet, the Sublime,
as Nirvana, as the Really Existing, the Unperverted.6. How do they become the world’s lights?
Here the Bodhisattvas win full enlightenment, and then take away all the darkness and
gloom of the un-cognition from beings who for long are enveloped in the membrane of the eggshell
of ignorance, and overcome by darkness, and they illuminate them through wisdom. (297,1)7.
How do they become the world’s leaders? When they have become enlightened, the Bodhisattvas
demonstrate dharma in order to reveal the absence of production and stopping in
the essential nature of form, etc.,and in the dharmas which constitute and distinguish ordinary
people,Disciples,Pratyekabuddhas,Bodhisattvasand Buddhas,and in all dharmas in general.8.
How are they the world’s resort? When they have become enlightened, the Bodhisattvas
demonstrate dharma by teaching that form, etc., is situated in the world’s space.All dharmas
are situated in space, they have not come, they have not gone, they are the same as space.Space
has not come, nor gone, it is not made, nor unmade, nor effected; it has not stood
up, does not last, nor endure; it is neither produced nor stopped. The same is true of
all dharmas which are, after the fashion of space, undiscriminate.(298) Because the emptiness
of form, etc., neither comes nor goes.Nor does the emptiness of all dharmas.For all dharmas
are situated in emptiness,and from that situation they do not depart.They are situated
in the signless,the wishless,the ineffective,in non-production,no-birth,in the absence
of positivity,in dreamand self,in the boundless,in the calm quiet,in Nirvana,in the Unrecoverable;they
have not come,nor gone,situated in immobility;they are situated in form, etc.,(299)
and in the full enlightenment of Arhats and Pratyekabuddhas.

