3. Description of perfect wisdomSubhuti: Who can understand this perfection of wisdom? The Lord:
Bodhisattvas who have coursed under Tathagatas in the past, and who have matured their
wholesome roots.Subhuti: What is their own-being? The Lord: Their own-being is isolated
from the need for discipline.

Subhuti: Will these Bodhisattvas be so situated that, after they have fully known this resort,
they demonstrate it to all beings? Is it in this sense that they will become the resort
of all beings? (300) The Lord: So it is, Subhuti.It is in this sense that a Bodhisattva will,
after he has known full enlightenment, become the resort of countless beings.

Subhuti: A doer of what is hard is the Bodhisattva who has armed himself with this armour: “Immeasurable
and incalculable beings I shall lead to Nirvana.”The Lord: The armour of such
a Bodhisattva is, however, not connected with form, etc., nor is it put on for the sake of
form, etc.It is not connected with the level of a Disciple,or a Pratyekabuddha,or a Buddha,
nor put on for their sake.For surely unconnected with all dharmas is that armour of a
Bodhisattva who is armed with the great armour.

Subhuti: Three standpoints one should not desire for a Bodhisattva who is armed with the great
armour and who courses thus in deep wisdom.Which three? The level of a Disciple, or of
a Pratyekabuddha, or of a Buddha.(301) The Lord: For what reason do you say that? It is, of
course, impossible, it cannot be, that such a Bodhisattva should belong to the vehicle of
the Disciples or Pratyekabuddhas.But, since he put on his armour for the sake of all beings,
surely he should desire the level of a Buddha.

Subhuti: Deep, O Lord, is perfect wisdom.It cannot be developed by anything,nor by anyone, nor
is there anything or anyone to be developed.For in perfect wisdom nothing at all has been
brought to perfection.The development of perfect wisdom is like the development of space,or
of all dharmas,or of non-attachment,of the infinite,of what is not,of not-taking-hold-of.

The Lord: So it is (302,1).Because of what you said a Bodhisattva, who adjusts himself to deep
and perfect wisdom, is to be regarded as irreversible from full enlightenment. For then
a Bodhisattva does not settle down in this deep and perfect wisdom,nor in the declarations
or counsels of others;he does not go by someone else whom he puts his trust in.When this
deep perfection of wisdom is being taught, he does not become cowed, or stolid, nor does
he turn his back on it; he will not tremble, be frightened, or terrified; he does not hesitate,
or doubt, or get stupefied, but he plunges right into it, becomes resolutely intent
on it, and delights in its vision and hearing.One should know that in a former life already
he has explored the perfection of wisdom.Because now, when this deep and perfect wisdom
is being taught, he does not tremble, is not frightened, nor terrified.

Subhuti: By means of what mode does a Bodhisattva who does not tremble when this deep perfection
of wisdom is being taught apperceive perfect wisdom? The Lord: This Bodhisattva apperceives
perfect wisdom through a series [of thoughts] which are inclined to all-knowledge.Subhuti:
How does one apperceive such a series of thoughts? (303) The Lord: Through a series
of thoughts inclined towards space, prone to space, sloping towards space.This apperception
is won through a series of thoughts inclined to all-knowledge.And why? Because all-knowledge
is immeasurable and unlimited.What is immeasurable and unlimited, that is not form,
or any other skandha. That is not attainment, or reunion, or getting there; not the path
or its fruit; not cognition, or consciousness; not genesis, or destruction, or production,
or passing away, or stopping, or development, or annihilation. It has not been made by anything,
it has not come from anywhere, it does not go to anywhere, it does not stand in any
place or spot. On the contrary, it comes to be styled ‘immeasurable, unlimited.’From the
immeasurableness of space is the immeasurableness of all-knowledge.But what is immeasurableness
that does not lend itself to being fully known by anything,be it form, or any skandha,
or any of the six perfections.Because form is all-knowledge,and so are the other skandhas,and
the six perfections.

Thereupon Sakra approached (304) and said:Deep, O Lord, is perfect wisdom.It is hard to fathom,hard
to see,hard to understand.The thought of a Tathagata who considers this depth of dharma,
and who, seated on the terrace of enlightenment, has just won full enlightenment, is
inclined to carefree non-action, and not to demonstration of dharma.

The Lord: So it is.Deep certainly is this dharma I have fully known.Nothing has been, or will
be, or is being fully known, and that is the depth of this dharma.This dharma which I have
fully known is deep through the depth of space,the depth of the self,the depth of the not-coming
of all dharmas,and of their not going.

(305) Sakra: It is wonderful, O Lord, it is astonishing, O Well-Gone!As contrary to the ways
of the whole world is this dharma demonstrated,- it teaches you not to seize upon dharmas,but
the world is wont to grasp at anything.

Chapter XVI Suchness

