4. Immeasurable, empty and talkSubhuti: How can one say that he begets the greater merit since
the Lord has described all accumulations as the result of false discrimination? The Lord:
In that case also the accumulation of merit on the part of a Bodhisattva who courses in
perfect wisdom must be described as just empty, worthless, insignificant and unsubstantial.To
the extent that a Bodhisattva goes on contemplating all dharmas in this manner, to that
extent he becomes one who does not lack in perfect wisdom.And to the extent that he does
not lack in perfect wisdom, to that extent he begets an immeasurable and incalculable heap
of merit.

Subhuti: Is there any distinction or difference between immeasurable and incalculable? The Lord:
It is ‘immeasurable’ because in it all measurements must cease.It is ‘incalculable’ because
it exhausts all efforts to count it.

Subhuti: Would there be a reason to assume that the skandhas are immeasurable? The Lord: Yes,
there would be.(347) Subhuti: Of what is that term ‘immeasurable’ a synonym? The Lord: Of
Emptiness,of the Signless,of the Wishless.

Subhuti: Is it a synonym only of those and not of the other dharmas? The Lord: Have I not described
all dharmas as ‘empty’? Subhuti: As simply empty has the Tathagata described all dharmas.The
Lord: And, being empty, they are also inexhaustible.And what is emptiness, that
is also immeasurableness.Therefore then, according to ultimate reality, no distinction or
difference can be apprehended between these dharmas.As talk have they been described by the
Tathagata. One just talks when one speaks of ‘immeasurable,’ or ‘incalculable,’ or ‘inexhaustible,’
or of ‘empty,’ or ‘signless,’ or ‘wishless,’ or ‘the Uneffected,’ or ‘Non-production,’
‘no-birth,’ ‘non-existence,’ ‘dispassion,’ ‘cessation,’ ‘Nirvana.’This exposition
has by the Tathagata been described as the consummation of his demonstrations.

(348) Subhuti: It is wonderful to see the extent to which the Tathagata has demonstrated the
true nature of all these dharmas, and yet one cannot properly talk about the true nature
of all these dharmas, [in the sense of predicating distinctive attributes to separate real
entities].As I understand the meaning of the Tathagata’s teaching, even all dharmas cannot
be talked about, in any proper sense?The Lord: So it is,for one cannot properly express
the emptiness of all dharmas in words.

