4. Enlightenment and emptinessSubhuti: How can the Lord say that full enlightenment is hard
to win,exceedingly hard to win, when there is no one who can win enlightenment? For, owing
to the emptiness of all dharmas,no dharma exists that would be able to win enlightenment.All
dharmas are empty.That dharma also for the forsaking of which dharma is demonstrated,
that dharma does not exist.And also that dharma which (314) would be enlightened in full enlightenment,
and that which should be enlightened, and that which would cognize [the enlightenment],
and that which should cognize it, - all these dharmas are empty.In this manner
I am inclined to think that full enlightenment is easy to win, not hard to win.The Lord:
Because it cannot possibly come about is full enlightenment hard to win,because in reality
it is not there,because it cannot be discriminated,because it has not been fabricated [as
a false appearance].

Sariputra: Also because it is empty is it hard to win, O Subhuti.For it does not occur to space
that it will win full enlightenment.As such, i.e. as without own-being, should these dharmas
be known in enlightenment.For all dharmas are the same as space.And, Subhuti, if full
enlightenment were easy to win, then countless Bodhisattvas would not turn away from it.But
as countless Bodhisattvas do turn away from it, therefore one can discern (315) that
full enlightenment is hard to win, exceedingly hard to win.

Subhuti: But, Sariputra, does form, etc., turn away from full enlightenment? Sariputra: No,
Subhuti.Subhuti: Is then the dharma which turns away from full enlightenment other than form,
etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does the Suchness of form, etc., turn away? Sariputra:
No, Subhuti.(316) Subhuti: Is the dharma which turns away from full enlightenment other
than the Suchness of form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does form, etc., know
full enlightenment? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Is the dharma which knows full enlightenment
other than form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does the Suchness of form,
etc., know full enlightenment? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.(317) Subhuti: Is the dharma which
knows full enlightenment other than the Suchness of form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti:
Should form, etc., be known in full enlightenment,or a dharma other than form, etc.(318)
or the Suchness of form, etc.,or a dharma other than the Suchness of form, etc.? Sariputra:
No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does Suchness turn away from full enlightenment? Sariputra: No,
Subhuti.Subhuti: Is that dharma which turns away from full enlightenment in Suchness? Sariputra:
No, Subhuti.(319) Subhuti: What then, Sariputra, is this dharma which turns away
from full enlightenment, when we consider it as it stands in this nature of dharmas, which
is just emptiness, after the manner of taking no stand on any dharma? Or what dharma, is
that Suchness? Is it perhaps Suchness which is turned away? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti:
Since thus, in ultimate truth and as things stand, no dharma can be apprehended as real,
what is that dharma which is turned away from full enlightenment? Sariputra: When one adopts
the method of considering dharmas in their ultimate reality, which Subhuti the Elder uses
in this exposition, then indeed there is no dharma which turns away from full enlightenment.But
then, Venerable Subhuti, there is no longer any ground for the distinction of those
who have set their hearts on enlightenment into three kinds of persons, as described by
the Tathagata, who differ with respect to the vehicle which they have chosen.According to
the exposition of the Venerable Subhuti there should be only one vehicle [for those whose
hearts are set on enlightenment], i.e. the Buddha-vehicle, the Bodhisattva-vehicle, the
great vehicle.

Purna: First of all the Venerable Sariputra must ask the Venerable Subhuti the Elder whether
he admits even one single kind of being whose heart is set on enlightenment, and who uses
either the vehicle of the Disciples, or that of the Pratyekabuddhas, or the great vehicle.Sariputra:
Subhuti, do you admit even one single kind of being whose heart is set on enlightenment,
and who uses either the vehicle of the Disciples, or that of the Bodhisattvas,
or the great vehicle? (320) Subhuti: Sariputra, do you see in the Suchness of Suchness even
one single being whose heart is set on enlightenment [i.e. as a real entity], be he one
who uses the vehicle of the Disciples, or that of the Pratyekabuddhas, or the great vehicle?
Sariputra: Not so, Subhuti.Suchness, first of all, is not apprehended as of three kinds,
how much less the being whose heart is set on enlightenment.Subhuti: Is then Suchness apprehended
as of one kind even? Sariputra: Not so, Subhuti.Subhuti: Do you then perhaps see
in Suchness even one single dharma which would constitute a being whose heart is set on enlightenment?
Sariputra: Not so, Subhuti.Subhuti: Since thus, in ultimate truth and as things
stand, such a dharma which could constitute a being whose heart is set on enlightenment
cannot be apprehended, where do you get the idea that “this one belongs to the vehicle of
the Disciples, that one to the vehicle of the Pratyekabuddhas, that one to the great vehicle”?
If a Bodhisattva who hears this absence of difference, distinction or differentiation
between the three kinds of persons who have set their hearts on enlightenment, in so far
as they are encompassed by the same Suchness, does not become cowed or stolid in mind, does
not turn back, then one should know that he will go forth to enlightenment.

(321) The Lord: Well said, Subhuti.Through the might and sustaining power of the Tathagata have
you been inspired to say this.Sariputra: To which enlightenment, O Lord, will that Bodhisattva
go forth? The Lord: To the full and supreme enlightenment.

