1. Various tokens of irreversibilitySubhuti: What, O Lord, are the attributes, tokens and signs
of an irreversible Bodhisattva, and how can we know that a Bodhisattva is irreversible?
The Lord: The level of the common people, the level of the Disciples, the level of the Pratyekabuddhas,
the level of the Buddhas - they are all called the “Level of Suchness.”With
the thought that all these are, through Suchness, not two, nor divided, not discriminated,
undiscriminate, he enters on this Suchness, this nature of dharma.After he has stood firmly
in Suchness, he neither imagines nor discriminates it. In that sense does he enter into
it.When he has thus entered on it, even when he has gone away from the assembly where he
has heard about Suchness, he does not hesitate, does not become perplexed, does not doubt,
and he is not stupefied by the thought [concerning form, etc.] that ‘it is not thus.’ On
the contrary, he firmly believes that ‘it is just thus, just Suchness,’ and like that he
plunges into it. But he does not prattle away about everything that comes into his head.
He only speaks when it is profitable [to others], and not when it is not profitable. He does
not look down on what others have done or have not done.Endowed with these attributes,
tokens and signs a Bodhisattva should be borne in mind as irreversible from full enlightenment.

Furthermore, an irreversible Bodhisattva does not pander to Shramanas and Brahmins of other
schools, telling them that they know what is worth knowing, that they see what is worth seeing.(324)
He pays no homage to strange Gods, offers them no flowers, incense, etc., does
not put his trust in them.He is no more reborn in the places of woe, nor does he ever again
become a woman.

Furthermore, Subhuti, an irreversible Bodhisattva undertakes to observe the ten avenues [ways]
of wholesome action.He himself observes, and he instigates others to observe, abstention
from taking life,abstention from taking what is not given,abstention from wrong conduct
as regards sensuous pleasures,abstention from intoxicants as tending to cloud the mind,abstention
from lying speech,abstention from malicious speech,abstention from harsh speech,abstention
from indistinct prattling,abstention from covetousness,abstention from ill will,abstention
from wrong views.(325) It is quite certain that an irreversible Bodhisattva observes
the ten ways of wholesome action, and instigates others to observe them, incites and
encourages them to do so, establishes and confirms others in them.Even in his dreams he never
commits offenses against those ten precepts, and he does not nurse such offenses in his
mind.Even in his dreams an irreversible Bodhisattva keeps the ten wholesome paths of action
present in his mind.

Furthermore, when an irreversible Bodhisattva masters a text of dharma, and offers it to others,
he has in mind the welfare and happiness of all beings,and he offers that gift of dharma
in common to all beings,without distinction.

(326) Furthermore, when deep dharmas are being taught, a Bodhisattva does not hesitate, does
not become perplexed, does not doubt, does not get stupefied. He only says what is beneficial,
he speaks gently and in moderation. He has little sloth and torpor, and he loses all
the latent biases to evil.Whether he goes out or comes back, his mind does not wander,but
his mindfulness is fixed before him.When he steps on the ground he knows what he does, and
when he lifts up or puts down his feethe neither loiters nor hurries but remains at ease.His
robe is free from lice,his habits are clean,he is rarely ill,and his afflictions are
few.In his body the eighty thousand families of worms which are present in the bodies of other
beings cannot at all develop,because his wholesome roots have elevated him above the
whole world.

And as those wholesome roots of his go on increasing, in due course he will gain the perfect
purity of body, speech and thought.(327) Subhuti: What should be known as perfect purity
of thought on the part of this Bodhisattva? The Lord: As those wholesome roots of his go on
increasing, in due course he will gain a state of mind where he has few cares, and is free
from treachery, deceit, crookedness and craftiness. In addition his perfect purity of thought
also consists in that he has transcended the level of Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas.

Furthermore, an irreversible Bodhisattva is not one to attach weight to gain, honour, or fame,
or to robes, alms bowl, lodging or medicinal appliances for use in sickness. He is not
one who is full of envy and meanness.And, when deep dharmas are being taught, he does not
lose heart;but his intelligence becomes steady, his intelligence goes deep. With respect he
hears the Dharma from others.All the dharmas which he hears from others he unites with the
perfection of wisdom,and also all worldly arts and professions he unites, thanks to the
perfection of wisdom, with the nature of dharma.There is not any dharma which he does not
see as yoked to the nature of dharmas,and each dharma he sees simply as engaged in that effort.
(328,1)

