1. Emptiness and reality-limitSubhuti: How should a Bodhisattva, who courses in perfect wisdom,
achieve the complete conquest of emptiness, or how should he enter into the concentration
on emptiness? The Lord: He should contemplate form, etc., as empty.But he should contemplate
that with an undisturbed series of thoughts in such a way that, when he contemplates
the fact that “form, etc., is empty,” he does not regard that true nature of dharmas [i.e.
emptiness] as something which, as a result of its own true nature [i.e. emptiness] is a
real entity.But when he does not regard that true nature of dharmas as a real thing, then
he cannot realise the reality-limit.Subhuti: With reference to the Lord having said that
“a Bodhisattva should not realise emptiness,”how does a Bodhisattva who has stood [firmly
in the repeated practice of] this concentration [on emptiness] not realize emptiness? The
Lord: It is because a Bodhisattva contemplates that emptiness which is possessed of the best
of all modes [i.e. of the six perfections]. He does, however, not contemplate that “I shall
realize,” or “I should realize,” but he contemplates that “this is the time for complete
conquest, and not for realization.” (371) Without losing himself in the concentration,
he ties his thought to an objective support [for his compassion] and he determines that he
will take hold of perfect wisdom [which is essentially skill in means], and that he will
not realize [emptiness, because its realization is not the final goal].Meanwhile, however,
the Bodhisattva does not lose the dharmas which act as the wings to enlightenment. He does
not effect the extinction of the outflows [which would prevent renewed rebirths], but over
that also he achieves complete conquest.At the time when a Bodhisattva dwells in the concentration
on emptiness – which is one of the doors to deliverance – he should also dwell
in the concentration on the Signless, but without realizing the Signless.For, endowed with
the dharma of the wholesome root which has thus come about, he contemplates that “this
is the time for maturing beings, and not for realization.”Taken hold of by perfect wisdom
he does not realize the reality limit.

