2. Three similesThe Lord: Suppose, Subhuti, that there were a most excellent hero, very vigorous,
of high social position, handsome, attractive and most fair to behold, of many virtues,
in possession of all the finest virtues, of those virtues which spring from the very height
of sovereignty, morality, learning, renunciation and so on. He is judicious, able to
express himself, to formulate his views clearly, to substantiate his claims; one who always
knows the suitable time, place and situation for everything. In archery he has gone as
far as one can go, he is successful in warding off all manner of attack, most skilled in all
arts, and foremost, through his fine achievements, in all crafts. He has a good memory,
is intelligent, clever, steady and prudent, versed in all the treatises, has many friends,
is wealthy, strong of body, with large limbs, with all his faculties complete, (372) generous
to all, dear and pleasant to many.Any work he might undertake he manages to complete,
he speaks methodically, shares his great riches with the many,honours what should be honoured,
reveres what should be revered, worships what should be worshipped.Would such a person,
Subhuti, feel ever increasing joy and zest? Subhuti: He would, O Lord.The Lord: Now suppose,
further, that this person, so greatly accomplished, should have taken his family with
him on a journey, his mother and father, his sons and daughters. By some circumstances,
they find themselves in a great, wild forest. The foolish ones among them would feel fright,
terror and hair-raising fear.He, however, would fearlessly say to his family: “Do not
be afraid! I shall soon take you safely and securely out of this terrible and frightening
forest. I shall soon set you free!”If then more and more hostile and inimical forces should
rise up against him in that forest,would this heroic man decide to abandon his family,
and to take himself alone out of that terrible and frightening forest - he who is not one
to draw back, who is endowed with all the force of firmness and vigour, who is wise, exceedingly
tender and compassionate, courageous and a master of many resources? (373) Subhuti:
No, O Lord.For that person, who does not abandon his family, has at his disposal powerful
resources, both within and without.On his side forces will arise in that wild forest which
are quite a match for the hostile and inimical forces, and they will stand up for him and
protect him.Those enemies and adversaries of his, who look for a weak spot, who seek for
a weak spot, will not gain any hold over him.He is competent to deal with the situation,
and is able, unhurt and uninjured, soon to take out of that forest both his family and himself,
and securely and safely they will reach a village, city or market-town.

The Lord: Just so, Subhuti, is it with a Bodhisattva who is full of pity and concerned with
the welfare of all beings, who dwells in friendliness, compassion, sympathetic joy and impartiality,
who has been taken hold of by skill in means and perfect wisdom, who has correctly
turned over his wholesome roots, employing the kind of transformation which has the Buddha’s
sanction. Although he enters into the concentrations which are the doors to deliverance,
i.e. the concentrations on emptiness, the signless and the wishless, - he nevertheless
just does not realise the reality-limit, i.e. neither on the level of a Disciple, nor on
that of a Pratyekabuddha.For he has at his disposal very strong and powerful helpers, in
perfect wisdom and skill in means.Since he has not abandoned all beings, he is thus able
to win full enlightenment, safely and securely.At the time when a Bodhisattva has made all
beings into an objective support for his thought of friendliness, and with the highest friendliness
ties himself to them, at that time he rises above the factiousness of the defilements
and of Mara, he rises above the level of Disciple and Pratyekabuddha, (374) and he
abides in that concentration [on friendliness].But he is not one who has attained the extinction
of the outflows, he achieves a complete conquest of emptiness, which [in his case]
is endowed with the highest perfections.At the time when a Bodhisattva dwells in the concentration
on emptiness, which is one door to freedom, at that time he does not dwell in the
concentration on the Signless,nor does he realise the concentration on the Signless.It is
just like a bird who on its wings courses in the air. It neither falls onto the ground, nor
does it stand anywhere on any support. It dwells in space, just in the air, without being
either supported or settled therein.Just so a Bodhisattva dwells in the dwelling of emptiness,
achieves complete conquest over emptiness. Just so he dwells in the dwelling of the
Signless and Wishless, and achieves complete conquest over the Signless and Wishless.But
he does not fall into emptiness, or into the Signless, or into the Wishless, with his Buddha-dharmas
remaining incomplete.It is as with a master of archery, strong, well trained,
perfectly trained in archery.He first would shoot one arrow upwards.He would then send after
that another arrow which would check the fall of the first. By a regular succession of
arrows he would not permit that first arrow to fall to the ground, and that arrow would be
kept up in the air until he should decide that it should fall to the ground.In the same way
a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wisdom and who is upheld by skill in means, does not
realise that farthest reality-limit until his wholesome roots are matured, well matured
in full enlightenment.Only when his wholesome roots are matured, well matured in full enlightenment,
(375) only then does he realise that farthest reality-limit.A Bodhisattva who
courses in perfect wisdom, who develops perfect wisdom, should therefore contemplate and meditate
on the deep true nature of those dharmas, but he should not realise it.

