4. Sadaprarudita and the merchant’s daughterAfter the Tathagatas had comforted the Bodhisattva
Sadaprarudita, they again disappeared.But Sadaprarudita emerged from his concentrations,and
asked himself “whence have those Tathagatas come, and whither have they gone?”Since he
could no longer see those Tathagatas, he was worried and pined away for them.He thought
to himself: “The holy Bodhisattva Dharmodgata has acquired the dharanis, he possesses the
five superknowledges, he has performed his duties under the Jinas of the past, he is my patron
and good friend,who for a long time has done good to me.When I have come to him I must
ask him about this matter, ask him to explain whence those Tathagatas have come, and whither
they have gone.”

Sadaprarudita thereupon nursed affection and confidence, esteem and respect for the Bodhisattva
Dharmodgata.He then reflected: “With what kind of honoring gift could I now approach the
Bodhisattva Dharmodgata? But I am poor,and have nothing of any value (495,1)with which
I could express my respect and reverence for him. It would not be seemly for me to come without
anything at all.But I am poor,and that now makes me sad and regretful.”

Such were the feelings, such was the attitude of reverence, with which the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita
proceeded on his journey. In due course he reached a town,went to the midst of the
marketplace, and decided that he would sell his own body, and with the price thereof do
honour to the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.“For through the long night of the past, in the measureless
cycle of birth-and-death, thousands of bodies of mine have been shattered, wasted,
destroyed and sold, again and again.I have experienced measureless pains in the hells for
the sake of sense pleasures, as a result of sense pleasures,but never yet on behalf of dharmas
of this kind, never yet for the purpose of doing honour to beings of such a kind.”Sadaprarudita
then went to the middle of the marketplace, lifted up his voice, and cried: “Who
wants a man? Who wants a man? Who wants to buy a man?”

Thereupon Mara the Evil One thought to himself: “Let obstruct this Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita.
For if he succeeds in selling himself out of concern for dharma, if he then goes on to honour
the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata, and to ask him, with regard to the perfection of wisdom
and to skill in means, how a Bodhisattva coursing in perfect wisdom may quickly achieve full
enlightenment, then he is bound to reach the ocean of sacred knowledge, shall become inaccessible
to Mara and his host, (496) and will reach the perfection of all qualities,after
which he will work the weal of all beings,and take them away from my sphere, and others
again he will take away after he has known full enlightenment.”

Mara, the Evil One, thereupon so disposed the Brahmins and householders in that town that they
could not hear the voice of Sadaprarudita.When Sadaprarudita could not find a buyer for
himself, he went on one side, wailed, shed tears,and said: “Alas, it is hard on us that we
do not find a buyer even for our body, so that we could, after selling our body, honour
the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.”

Thereupon Sakra, Chief of Gods, thought to himself: “Let me weigh up the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita.
Will he now, filled with earnest intention, renounce his body out of concern for dharma,
or will he not?”Sakra then conjured up the guise of a young man, went to the Bodhisattva
Sadaprarudita,and said to him: “Why do you, son of good family, stand there dejected,
pining away and shedding tears?” (497) Sadaprarudita replied: “I want to sell myself,but
I cannot find anyone to buy my body.”Sakra, in the form of the young man, said: “On behalf
of what do you want to sell yourself?” Sadaprarudita replied: “From love for dharma I want
to sell myself, so as to do worship to dharma, and to honour the holy Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.But
I do not find a buyer for this body of mine.I have therefore thought to myself
that, alas, I must be a person of exceedingly small merit indeed.”The young man said: “I myself
have no need of a man.But my father is due to offer sacrifice.For that I require a man’s
heart, his blood and the marrow of his bones.Those you may give me, and I shall pay for
them.” Sadaprarudita then thought to himself: “I have exceedingly easily got what I desired.
Now I know that my body is sufficiently perfect for me to win perfect wisdom, skill
in means and the dharmas of a Buddha, since in this young man I have now found a buyer for
my heart, blood and marrow.”With his mind bristling with joy, and all ready, he said: “I
will give you my body, since you have need of it!”The young man asked: “What price do I give
you?” Sadaprarudita answered: “Give me whatever you will!” (498,1)Sadaprarudita then took
a sharp sword, pierced his right arm, and made the blood flow.He pierced his right thigh,
cut the flesh from it, and strode up to the foot of a wall in order to break the bone.A
merchant’s daughter, from her upper window,saw this,and she thought to herself: “Why should
this son of good family do that to himself? Let me go to him, and ask him.”She went up
to Sadaprarudita,and said: “Why do you inflict such fatal treatment on yourself? What shall
you do with this blood, and with the marrow of your bones?” Sadaprarudita said: “When I
have sold them to this young man, I shall go to worship the perfection of wisdom, and to do
honour to the holy Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.”

The merchant’s daughter said: “What is the kind of quality, what is the excellence of the qualities,
which you will create in yourself by your wish to honour the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata
after you have sold your own heart, blood and marrow?” Sadaprarudita replied: “Dharmodgata
will explain to me the perfection of wisdom and the skill in means.(499) In them I shall
train myself,and, as a result, I shall become a refuge to all beings;and, after I have
known full enlightenment, I shall acquire a body of golden colour,the thirty-two marks of
the superman, the eighty accessory marks, the splendour of a halo the rays of which extend
to infinitude, the great friendliness, the great compassion, the great sympathetic joy,
the great impartiality,the four grounds of self-confidence, the four analytical knowledges,
the eighteen special dharmas of a Buddha, and I shall acquire the five superknowledges,
an unthinkable purity of conduct, an unthinkable purity of concentration, an unthinkable purity
of wisdom, and the ten powers of a Tathagata.I shall fully awake to the supreme cognition
of a Buddha,and acquire the supremely precious jewel of the dharma, which I shall share
with all beings.”

The merchant’s daughter replied: “It is wonderful, son of good family, how exalted and sublime
are the dharmas which you have proclaimed.For the sake of even one of these dharmas should
one be willing to renounce one’s bodies even for countless aeons, how much more so for
the sake of many of them.These dharmas which you have proclaimed please me also, and seem
good to me.But see, son of good family, I shall give you whatever you may require,and with
that you may (500) then honour that Bodhisattva Dharmodgata!But do not inflict such treatment
on yourself!I also will come with you to the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata!I also will, together
with you, plant wholesome roots, which will help to win such dharmas!”

Sakra, Chief of Gods, thereupon threw off his disguise as a young man, and in his own proper
body he stood before the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita, and said to him: “I applaud your firm
sense of obligation.In the past also the Tathagatas have had so great a desire for dharma,
and it was that which helped them to know full enlightenment and to gain the precious jewel
of the Dharma, after they had first coursed in the course of a Bodhisattva, and asked
questions about the perfection of wisdom and skill in means.I have no need of your heart,
blood or marrow. I only came here to test you.Now choose a boon.I shall give you any boon
whatever!” Sadaprarudita answered: “Give me the supreme dharmas of a Buddha!”Sakra, Chief
of Gods, replied: “That lies not within my province.That lies within the province of the Buddhas,
the Lords.Choose another boon!”Sadaprarudita replied: “Do not trouble your mind about
the mutilated condition of my body!I shall myself now make it whole again by the magical
power of my enunciation of the Truth.As I am in truth irreversible, have been predicted
to full enlightenment, and am known to the Tathagatas by my unconquerable resolution, - may
through this Truth, through this utterance of the Truth this my body be again as it was
before!” (501,1)That very moment, instant and second, through the Buddha’s might and through
the perfect purity of the Bodhisattva’s resolution, the body of the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita
became again as it had been before, healthy and whole.And Sakra, Chief of Gods, and
Mara, the Evil One, reduced to silence, just vanished from that place.

The merchant’s daughter then said to Sadaprarudita: “Come on, son of good family,let us go up
to my house.I shall ask my parents to give you the riches with which you can express your
desire to worship that perfection of wisdom, and to honour that Bodhisattva Dharmodgata,
a desire which is due to your love for dharma.”The Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita and the merchant’s
daughter went together to her house.When they got to it, Sadaprarudita remained standing
on the threshold,

while the merchant’s daughter went into the house, and said to her parents: “Mummy and daddy,
you must give me a part of your wealth!I want to go away with the five hundred maidens you
gave me for servants!Together with the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita I want to go to the Bodhisattva
Dharmodgata, in order to worship him.And he shall demonstrate dharma to us,and that
way we shall acquire the dharmas of a Buddha.” (502,1)Her parents replied: “Who then is
this Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita, and where is he just now?” The merchant’s daughter said:
“This son of good family stands at the threshold of the door to our house.And he has set
out determined to know full enlightenment, in other words, he wants to set all beings free
from the immeasurable sufferings of birth-and-death.” And she told them all that she had
seen and heard, (503) how Sadaprarudita had sold his body, and mutilated it, and how she asked
him for his reason, and how he praised and revealed to her the unthinkable qualities
of a Buddha and the immeasurable dharmas of a Buddha, which he had in mind as his goal.She
went on to say that “When I had heard of those unthinkable qualities of a Buddha, I felt
an exceeding joy and elation.And I thought to myself: ‘It is wonderful to what an extent this
son of good family is a doer of what is hard, and how much he must love the dharma to
endure oppression and pain in his body.For it is from love for dharma that he renounced himself.How
can we fail to worship dharma, and to make a vow to reach such stations, we who
have vast and abundant possessions?’ (504,1)So I said to that son of good family: ‘Do not
inflict such fatal treatment on yourself!I shall give you abounding riches,which you may use
to worship and honour that holy Bodhisattva Dharmodgata,I also shall go together with you
to that Bodhisattva,and I shall worship him, too.I also shall accomplish those supreme
dharmas of a Buddha which you have proclaimed!’Mummy and daddy, allow me to go,and give me
the riches I have asked for!”

Her parents replied: “It is wonderful how well you have related the hardships of that son of
good family.Unthinkable, for sure must be the dharmas for the sake of which he endures these
hardships, they must be the most distinguished in the whole world, a source of happiness
to all beings! We will give you our permission to go.We also should like to come with you,to
see, to salute, to honour, to worship that Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.”

The daughter replied: “Do as you say.I would not oppose those who are on the side of what is
right.”

