1. Conditions which open a bodhisattva to Mara’s influenceAt the time when a Bodhisattva trains
in perfect wisdom, makes endeavours about it and develops it, all the Evil Maras in the
great trichiliocosm are in a state of uncertainty: “Will this Bodhisattva prematurely realize
the reality-limit on the level of Disciple or Pratyekabuddha, or will he know full enlightenment?”Moreover,
when a Bodhisattva dwells in the dwelling of perfect wisdom, the Evil
Maras are pierced by the dart of sorrow.When a Bodhisattva courses in perfect wisdom,
makes endeavours about it and develops it, the Evil Maras think how they can hurt him. They
may, for instance, try to make him afraid by letting loose a shower of meteors in all directions,
causing the impression that the horizon is all aflame. They hope that then the Bodhisattva
will become cowed, that his hair will stand on end, so that at least one single
thought directed on full enlightenment might get extinguished.(417) But Mara, the Evil One,
does not attempt to hurt each and every Bodhisattva. Some he tries to hurt, and others
not.

Ananda: What kind of a Bodhisattva does Mara try to hurt? The Lord: Mara tries to hurt a Bodhisattva
who in the past, when the perfection of wisdom was being taught, did not produce
a thought of firm belief, and he gains entry to him.

He tries to hurt Bodhisattvas who, when this deep perfection of wisdom is being taught, are
seized by uncertainties, feel perplexed, and think that “perhaps this perfection of wisdom
is so, perhaps it is not so”;

or Bodhisattvas who lack the good friend, who have been taken hold of by bad friends, who, when
the perfection of wisdom is being taught, do not hear about the very deep stations, remain
in ignorance of them, and do not ask how the perfection of wisdom should be developed;

or Bodhisattvas who cling to someone who upholds that which is not the true dharma, and say:
“I am his adherent, and in all things he does not abandon me. (418) There are many other
Bodhisattvas whom I might adhere to,but they do not suit me.I have taken this one as my fitting
companion and he will suit me.”

Moreover, a Bodhisattva might, when this deep perfection of wisdom is being taught, say to another
Bodhisattva: “Deep, indeed, is this perfection of wisdom!What point is there in your
listening to it? For even when I apply myself to it in the way in which the Tathagata has
taught in the other Sutrantas,even then I do not get to the bottom of it, nor derive any
enjoyment from it.What is the point in your hearing and writing it? In that way he tries
to estrange other Bodhisattvas.Mara comes also to such a Bodhisattva, tries to hurt him, and
gains entry to him.

Furthermore, Ananda, Mara becomes contented, elated and enraptured, he is overjoyed, exultant
and glad, thrilled, delighted and jubilant, in case a Bodhisattva despises other Bodhisattvas,
and thinks: “I dwell in the dwelling of detachment, but not so they; not theirs the
dwelling in detachment.”And Mara is so joyful because this Bodhisattva keeps far away from
full enlightenment.

Furthermore, when a Bodhisattva takes on a name or clan, or when his ascetic qualities are proclaimed,
he may regard that as a sufficient reason to despise other Bodhisattvas, well-behaved
and lovely in character though they may be.(419) But he has not got the qualities of
irreversible Bodhisattvas who course in perfect wisdom, nor their attributes, tokens or
signs.Since he has not got the irreversible qualities, he gives rise to defilement, i.e. he
exalts himself, deprecates others, and thinks that they are not equal to those dharmas,
as he is.The Evil Maras then foresee that the realms of Mara will not remain empty,that the
great hells, the animal kingdom, the world of the Pretas, and the assemblies of the Asuras
will be overcrowded.And Mara, the Evil One, becomes still more determined, and thinks:
“With this kind of start those Bodhisattvas will soon be smothered by gain and honour.They
will become plausible talkers, and with their plausible talk they will catch hold of many
people.Those people will decide to listen to them,will imitate what they have seen and heard,and
in consequence will not train in Thusness, not progressing in it, not making endeavours
about it,they will still further increase their defilements.So it will come about that
all the deeds - of body, voice or mind - which they may undertake with their perverted
mentality shall lead them to a rebirth in conditions which are unserviceable, disagreeable,
unpleasing, and unpleasant.In consequence the realms of Mara will become overcrowded, i.e.
the great hells, the animal world, the world of the Pretas, and (420) the assemblies of
the Asuras.”When he considers this sequence of events, Mara the Evil One becomes contented,
elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant.

Furthermore, Ananda, when a Bodhisattva fights with a person belonging to the vehicle of the
Disciples, disputes and quarrels with him, abuses and reviles him, feels ill-will and hatred
for him, then Mara thinks that “surely, this son of good family will keep away from all-knowledge,
he will remain far away from it.” Mara becomes still more jubilant if a person
belonging to the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas fights with someone else who also belongs to
the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas,for he thinks that “both these Bodhisattvas remain far from
all-knowledge.”

But if a Bodhisattva who has had his prediction fights with another Bodhisattva who has also
had his prediction, and cherishes malice for him – for a great many aeons he must, if he
has such an attitude of mind, put on the armour [which enables him to struggle against it],
- unless, of course, he has abandoned all-knowledge completely. (421,1)

