2. Emptiness, defilements and purificationSubhuti: How is perfect wisdom marked? (399) The Lord:
It has non-attachment for mark.Subhuti: Would it be feasible to say that that same mark
of non-attachment, which exists in perfect wisdom, exists also in all dharmas? The Lord:
So it is, Subhuti.For all dharmas are isolatedand empty.Therefore that same mark of non-attachment,
which makes perfect wisdom isolated and empty, also makes all dharmas isolated
and empty.Subhuti: If all dharmas are isolated and empty, how is the defilement and purification
of beings conceivable? For what is isolated cannot be defiled or purified,what is
empty cannot be defiled or purified,and what is isolated and empty cannot know full enlightenment.Nor
can one get at any dharma outside emptiness which has known full enlightenment,
which will know it, or which does know it.How then shall we understand the meaning of this
teaching? Show us, O Lord, show us, O Sugata!The Lord: What do you think, Subhuti.Do beings
course for a long time in I-making and mine-making? (400) Subhuti: So it is, Lord.The
Lord: Are also I-making and mine-making empty? Subhuti: They are, O Lord.The Lord: Is it
just because of their I-making and mine-making that beings wander about in birth-and-death?
Subhuti: So it is, Lord.The Lord: It is in that sense that the defilement of beings becomes
conceivable.To the extent that beings take hold of things and settle down in them, to
that extent is there defilement.But no one is thereby defiled.And to the extent that one does
not take hold of things and does not settle down in them, to that extent can one conceive
of the absence of I-making and mine-making.In that sense can one form the concept of the
purification of beings,i.e. to the extent that they do not take hold of things and do not
settle down in them, to that extent there is purification.But no one is therein purified.When
a Bodhisattva courses thus, he courses in perfect wisdom.It is in this sense that one
can form the concept of the defilement and purification of beings in spite of the fact
that all dharmas are isolated and empty.Subhuti: This is truly wonderful!And a Bodhisattva
who courses thus, he courses in perfect wisdom.Because he then does not course in form, or
the other skandhas.When he courses thus, (401) a Bodhisattva cannot be crushed by the whole
world with its Gods, men and Asuras.When he courses thus, a Bodhisattva surpasses the
coursings of all the persons who belong to the vehicle of the Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas,
and he gains an insuperable position.For Buddhahood is insuperable, and so is Tathagatahood,
the state of the Self-Existent, the state of all-knowledge.A Bodhisattva, who day and
night passes his time dwelling on these mental activities associated with perfect wisdom,
is quite near full enlightenment and shall quickly know it.

