4. Emptiness and growth in enligthenmentSubhuti: If that is so, how can a Bodhisattva arrive,
without an increase in perfect wisdom, at the full attainment of enlightenment, how can
he know full enlightenment? The Lord: In actual fact a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect
wisdom neither increases or decreases.Just as perfect wisdom is empty, without increase or
decrease, just so also a Bodhisattva is empty,without increase or decrease.It is because
of this fact, - i.e. that just as perfect wisdom is empty, (406) without increase or decrease,
so also the Bodhisattva is empty,without increase or decrease,- that a Bodhisattva arrives
at the full attainment of enlightenment, and thus knows full enlightenment.If a Bodhisattva,
when this is being taught, is not afraid nor loses heart, then he should be known
as a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wisdom.

Subhuti: Does then perfect wisdom course in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does
the emptiness of perfect wisdom course in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti:
Can one then apprehend outside the emptiness of perfect wisdom any dharma which courses
in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does emptiness course in perfect wisdom?
(407) The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Can one apprehend in emptiness any dharma that courses
in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does emptiness course in emptiness?
The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does form, etc., course in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti:
Can one apprehend outside form, etc., any dharma which courses in perfect wisdom?
The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: How then does a Bodhisattva course in perfect wisdom?
The Lord: Do you then, Subhuti, see a real dharma which courses in perfect wisdom? Subhuti:
No, Lord.(408) The Lord: Do you see that perfect wisdom, in which the Bodhisattva courses,
as a real thing? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Do you see as real that dharma which offers
no basis for apprehension? Has that dharma by any chance been produced, or will it be
produced, or is it being produced, has it been stopped, will it be stopped, or is it being
stopped? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: This insight gives a Bodhisattva the patient acceptance
of dharmas which fail to be produced.When he is endowed with that, he is predestined to
full enlightenment.He is bound to progress towards the self-confidence of a Tathagata. It
is quite impossible that a Bodhisattva, who courses, strives and struggles in this way,
and progresses in this direction, should not reach the supreme cognition of a Buddha, the
cognition of the all-knowing, the cognition of the great Caravan Leader.

Subhuti: Can the true nature of all dharmas, which consists in the fact that they fail to be
produced, can that be predestined to full enlightenment? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: How
then in that case does the prediction of this dharma to full enlightenment take place?
The Lord: Do you see as real that dharma which has a prediction to full enlightenment? (409)
Subhuti: No, Lord.I do not see any real dharma which is at any time predestined to full
enlightenment.Nor do I see any real dharma which is known by the enlightened, which should
be known to them, or by means of which they would have their full knowledge.It is because
all dharmas cannot be apprehended, that it does not occur to me to think that “this dharma
is known to the Enlightened, this dharma should be known to them, by means of this dharma
they do have their full knowledge.”

Chapter XXIII Sakra

