3. The buddhas praise the bodhisattvaFor the Buddhas and Lords, who reside in the countless
world-systems, and who, surrounded by the congregation of monks and attended by a multitude
of Bodhisattvas, demonstrate dharma, will proclaim the name, clan, power, appearance and
form of a Bodhisattva who courses and dwells in perfect wisdom, and who is endowed with the
virtues of roaming in perfect wisdom. And they will, when they demonstrate Dharma, exult
over that Bodhisattva, proclaiming his name, clan, power, colour and form.Just here and
now I demonstrate dharma, and I proclaim the name, etc., of the Bodhisattva Ratnaketu, and
of the Bodhisattva Sikhin. (450) I exult over them, and also over the other Bodhisattvas
who just now lead the holy life with the Tathagata Akshobhya.In a similar way, the Buddhas
in other Buddha-fields proclaim the name, etc., of those Bodhisattvas who just now lead the
holy life here in my Buddha-field, and who dwell in the dwelling of perfect wisdom. And
they exult over them.

Subhuti: Do the Buddhas honour all Bodhisattvas in such a manner? The Lord: No, Subhuti.But
only those who are irreversible and free from all attachment.Subhuti: Are there, apart from
the irreversible Bodhisattvas, any other Bodhisattvas whom the Buddhas honour in such a
manner? The Lord: Yes, there are. They are persons belonging to the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas,
who are strong in resisting the enemy.They are (451) just now engaged in learning the
course of a Bodhisattva under the Tathagata Akshobhya, and the Bodhisattva Ratnaketu, course
there on the pilgrimage of a Bodhisattva, and dwell engaged in learning it.

In addition, those Bodhisattvas who course in perfect wisdom, and who resolutely believe that
“all dharmas fail to be produced” without, however, having so far acquired definitely the
patient acceptance of dharmas which fail to be produced;as well as those who resolutely
believe that “all dharmas are calmly quiet,” without, however, having entered into the attainment
of the irreversible domain over all dharmas;those Bodhisattvas who dwell in this dwelling
are honoured by the Buddhas in the above manner.(452) But Bodhisattvas of whom the
Buddhas proclaim the name, etc., and over whom they exult, must have forsaken the level of
the Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas,and one must expect them to be on the level of the Buddha.And
they shall be predicted to full enlightenment.For Bodhisattvas of whom the Buddhas
proclaim the name, etc., and over whom they exult, they also shall stand in irreversibility.

